Members of the Nobel Committee, Brothers and Sisters,

I come before you, having just received the Nobel Peace Prize from so prestigious an academy, in order to share a reflection about my continent and our struggle.

I would like to give thanks to everyone for the invitation to speak in this chamber of high learning. Not only to receive me personally, but by the mark of appreciation, recognition and esteem that this invitation implies with respect to the values and actions which sustain and are the hope and faith of our people in the struggle for justice and respect for the dignity of persons as the necessary condition for attaining true peace.

I come as a man of the people, with humility and steadfastness to share with you this reality that I live and know.

When receiving the Nobel Peace Prize, I said, from the first moment, I do not assume a personal honor, but receive it in the name of the people of Latin America, and most especially in the name of the poor, the most small and needy, the indigenous, the peasants, the workers, the young, and the many thousand members of the religious orders who work in the most inhospitable places of our continent, and of all those persons of goodwill who work and struggle to build a society free from domination.

I would like to turn my attention to the anguish and hopes of our Latin Americans, not as a politician or technocrat in regard to social problems, but as a man identifying with the cause of the people in the daily struggle in defense of human rights and the affirming of values, and as a man who shares their hopes and faith in complete liberation.

In the last decades the Church initiated a new kind of reflection and action: the consideration of faith in regard to the brother or sister who suffers, who is dispossessed, the poor.

It is the faces of our workers, peasants, young, old, indigenous, and children that are the face of our Lord, Jesus Christ, who calls us to the obligation to love our brothers and sisters.

The Latin American bishops, gathered in Puebla de los Angeles in Mexico to assess the Latin American reality, gave thought from this perspective: to assume for the Church an inescapable commitment: the first priority must be the poor.

And from all which stood in the way of reflection on the life of our peoples, there is surging forth a new active theology and way of living the faith.

Thus is assumed a reasoned understanding of faith, an intent to know and explain the desperate reality that we live. The poor will not now be seen as objects of charity, as isolated individuals, but as products of a system of structures of injustice that produce marginalisation, misery, and hunger for our people.

It was a sharing of experiences and apprehending knowledge of this reality in all its aspects and facets. For Christians, faith cannot be foreign to these problems; theology, then, was considered as a reflection of this faith and of the moral force of the Word, for the work of liberation from injustice and from sin, in its structural as well as personal dimension.

Reflection is only a partial understanding of truth if it does not translate itself in practice into commitments to the common good and justice. Truth is not mere abstraction, but something to be done; and is only apprehended when this is realized.

It is this concrete work, which Christians must undertake in great numbers, that will lead to the process of liberation of our people.

Like many other persons and Christian organizations, ours, the Service for Peace and Justice in Latin America - of which as General Coordinator I am the current voice for its work and objectives - tries to encourage and exert our efforts on the path toward achieving a society free from domination that overcomes systems of injustice and inspires the fraternal embrace between humans and the reconciliation with God.

Our voice seeks to be the voice of those who have no voice, of those who are excluded, of the humble and small.

Our hands seek to speak the language of those who labor, to add to the effort to construct a new world solidarity founded on love, justice, liberty and truth.

Our analysis is a direct consequence of this commitment; our practice is the theory and use of nonviolence based on the gospel. This is a spirit and a method, the participative power of the struggle for the needs of the most small who are the elect of our Lord, who animates them with His spirit to organize themselves and unite to accomplish their own liberation. It is thus, in this way we are facing our work in Latin America.

I would like now to speak of Latin America, this reality which was defined by the beloved Pope Paul VI as el Continente de la Esperanza, ("the Continent of Hope").

It seems that in Latin America, as we come wanting to help, we suffer the shock of the contradictions between two models of development of our nations sustained by force and social diversity.

Our Latin American nations have said of our people: "They have taken opportunities to use their talents and to organize themselves and have shown they can succeed to obtain vindication for their just rights".

The stifling of these rights weighs heavily on this creative capacity and also weighs down the natural economic richness and development of our countries. Latin America lives the anguish of an economically unequal growth that accompanies a development not integral to the participation of the people. This generates conflict that manifests itself in many ways in all parts of our societies.

I speak of situations like that of Bolivia where a military regime pays no heed and oppresses the will of a people.

I speak of Salvador where the general violence, product of structures of domination and injustices with the force of law, seen for decades, compromises today the practical possibility of a peaceful solution.

I speak of Cuba, its prisoners and politicians responsible for clear transgressions against human rights. I speak of Paraguay, Chile, Brazil, Guatemala, countries where there exists no capacity for constitutional order nor any intent to institute such order for the openly limited and deceitful forms that will not grant to the people their authentic right to be makers of their own destiny.

I speak of my own Argentina where situations have led to systems of injustice that we share with the rest of our large Latin American fatherland. These have devolved into violence from both the Left and the Right which have resulted in the murdered, the injured, the disappeared, the tortured, prisoned, and exiled.

This situation, anguished and unjust, is shared by all responsible sectors of national life. It is felt with sorrow by the families of the disappeared, and especially the mothers, like the mothers of the Plaza de Mayo whose valorous and international action for peace is a patient witness bearing the sorrow of uncertainty about the fate of their sons.

The churches, the workers' organizations, the political parties and the institutions for the defense of human rights have all demanded a solution of this problem that stands in the way of a real meeting of the Argentines.

I do not wish to speak more of the above mentioned injustices, since I do not believe the latter is the struggle for you here. These are things I must deal with in my own country and confront with the present government.

I want to express, with special emphasis, my total support for the Pope's mediation regarding the boundary conflict between the Argentine republic and that of Chile, my brothers.

We know, as His Holiness John Paul II has observed, that there are no differences between our countries that cannot be overcome peacefully. We also know the unique benefits this belief could bring in a similar disaster; and already disasters are in the making from the traffickers in arms and those who want to help certain parties to divide the Latin American peoples.

The only possible solution is peace, since war means only a useless spilling of blood, and, besides, a grave violation of the dignity of both peoples, and even those who are mere spectators of the conflict.

I speak of a continent where millions of persons live who are subjected to the violence of hunger, of endemic disease, of illiteracy, of homelessness, of persecution, both for political reasons and against labor unions.

I speak, in summary, of Latin America where we experience constant violations of the human rights of the people. The violence is expressed toward the disappeared, the prisoners, the tortured, the exiles, the lack of freedom of the press, etc. ... it is not only with the attacks against the rights of persons that we must deal. We must analyze also, in all the dimensions of this reality, the deep structural causes which generate these conflict situations. For that, the struggle for the dignity of the individual must consider society as much as the individual in all which has to do with the development of the rights of the people.

But this same continent and these same human beings live, besides, in the hope of making their own history. And to this immense task, where I humbly include myself, we take no more than our own hands and great faith.

To those of you also involved in this struggle on behalf of the poor, I want to bring you the image of this deeply absorbing situation and its significance for world peace.

Latin America does not see itself in the same way, but finds itself caught between an economic-political system and an international social system in profound transformation. Its image of violence reflects the violence of our contemporary world. Its injustices are bound up within an unjust international system, a system whose mechanisms, in the words of John Paul II, "are mechanisms encountered impregnated not with an authentic humanism, but with materialism producing an international standard with the rich ever richer at the expense of the poor ever poorer".

It is necessary to create the conditions that permit displacing the mechanisms which secure the domination of one country over another. I want to affirm, together with our Latin American pastors in the meeting at Puebla, that in the ability to live together, "... all human beings hold the common good as fundamental, consistent with the ever more fraternal realization of common dignity which does not use some persons as tools for the benefit of others, and that all be disposed to sacrifice for some particular good ends". This common dignity necessarily implies the existence of liberty.

And for us liberty is that inalienable capacity that all humans alike have at their disposal.

This is the capacity that permits the building of communion and participation which encourage human beings to relate fully with the world, with their brothers and sisters and with God.

I see with concern that this new international system, marked as it is by the existence of great multinational corporations, is far from increasing participation and improving channels of expression for the majority. What is essential are new constructs that allow political participation, eliminating the distance between the governors and the governed, that support the privileges of minorities, and do not hold on to the old, the known and worn-out structures of injustice.

The rules of the game established by the powerful and imposed on the rest of the world make possible the grand crime of our epoch, the arms race. This produces a useless diversion of resources which could be dedicated to the development of our nations. These powers produce and reproduce the conditions of injustice and domination. Such obstacles obstruct the exercise of the full rights of the people and oblige the workers of all latitudes to struggle for labor and political rights - as much in Latin America, as in Poland, in Africa and Asia.

The cause for human rights is the same, in one way or another, in the United States and the Soviet Union.

We would especially like to express our solidarity with Dr. Andrei Sakharov, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate of 1975. May he soon regain his liberty, together with Mr. Anatoly Shcharansky, both of whom are detained in the Soviet Union.

We have been speaking here of the anguish over the reality in which Latin America is living, and in particular I have referred to the situation in my country, Argentina. Also I have shown here our active preoccupation with the problems that all people of the world live with in their tireless struggle in defense of their inalienable rights.

I would like now to speak of my hope because it is that which empowers our actions and commitment.

Beginning to speak of this, I am remembering a martyr to peace, the Archbishop of Salvador, Monsignor Oscar Romero, who in his work of the gospel, shared in the way of the people even to giving his life for them. Even his martyrdom is a sign of hope.

Our hope is the benevolent notice of Christ Jesus, who in these days of the Advent and Christmas season fortifies human conscience in all latitudes. We take hope because we believe with St. Paul that love never dies, and that humankind, in the historical process, has always created enclaves of love in solidarity with the active practice of the full rights of persons.

For this, our testimony in the world cannot be limited to the exercise of critical judgement of the injustices of the social, economic, and political order or to the consequent denunciation of the sins of those responsible.

The Christian must act. Act, not based on the conviction that the Christian possesses the key to the secrets of social problems or because he knows how to extract from the Gospels infallible models to transform all situations.

The Christian must act together with all men of goodwill, bringing his humble strength to support the building of a world more just and humane.

I want to affirm with emphasis: this world is possible.

The social order we seek is not a utopia. It is a world where political life is understood in terms of active participation by the governors and the governed in the realization of the common good.

We do not believe in consensus by force. We are accustomed to hearing, wherever human rights are being violated, that it is being done in the name of higher interests. I declare that there exists no higher interest than the human being.

I point out my conviction in the maturity of the people, who are able to govern themselves without paternalistic guardians.

For this reason we have hope. We believe in the vocation and participation of our people, who day to day are awakened to their political conscience and express their desire for change and the complete democratization of society. A change based on justice, built with love, and which will bring us the most anxiously desired fruit of peace.

We must all commit ourselves to this task. And I want my voice to help build the chorus of voices so that the clamor for justice will become deafening.

I live this hope which I am sure I share with many others. I am confident that one day our daily effort will have its reward.

We are working to serve the plan of the Lord, the One whom the prophet Isaiah promised us when he said:

    The Lord shall govern the nations, direct and set right the peoples; they shall beat their swords into ploughshares and quit the use of their spears. One nation will not lift its sword against another, neither shall they learn war any more.

I wish, finally, to show my deep gratitude to the members of the Nobel Committee and to all those present and to all the people of Norway for having given me such a high distinction.

I am deeply moved and commit myself to redouble my efforts in the struggle for peace.

I implore our Lord that He may, with his infinite mercy, illumine us and guide us on the road to peace and justice.

Peace and good wishes to all.

Muchas gracias. Many thanks.


Your Majesty, Mr. President of the Nobel Committee, Committee Members, Ladies and Gentlemen:

With humility I stand before you to receive the high distinction that the Nobel Committee and the Parliament grant to those who have committed their lives on behalf of peace and to the pursuit of justice and solidarity among nations.

I would like to receive this award in the name of the people of Latin America and especially in the name of the poorest and smallest of my brothers and sisters, who are the most beloved children of God. I receive it in the name of my indigenous brothers and sisters, the peasants, workers, and young people, in the name of the thousands of members of religious orders and of men and women of goodwill, who renounce privileges to share the life and way of the poor, and who struggle to build a new society.

For a man like myself, a small voice for those who have no voice, who struggles so that the cry of the people may be heard in all its power, for one without any special identity except as a veritable Latin American man and as a Christian, - this is, without any doubt, the highest honour that I can receive: to be considered a servant of peace.

I come from a continent that lives between anguish and hope, where my own history is being written. I am convinced that the gospel power of nonviolence presents a choice that opens up for us a challenge of new and radical perspectives. It is an option which gives priority to the essential Christian value: the dignity of the human being; the sacred, transcendent and irrevocable dignity that belongs to the human being by reason of being a child of God and a brother or sister in Christ, and therefore, our own brother and sister.

In these long years of struggle for our organisation, the Service for Peace and Justice in Latin America, we have shared the path together with the poorest and most necessitous.

We have not much to say but much to share in order to achieve by nonviolent struggle the abolition of injustice and the attainment of a more just and humane society for all.

It is walking together with our brothers and sisters, those who are persecuted, who hunger and thirst for justice, who suffer oppression, who live in anguish by the prospect of war, who suffer aggressive violence or see regularly postponed the attainment of their elemental rights.

It is for all these that I am here today.

Would that my voice could have the strength of voice of the humble, a voice that denounces injustice and proclaims hope in God and humanity. This is the hope of all human beings who long to live in harmony in common with all persons as brothers and sisters and as children of God.

Latin America is a continent young and vital, which was described by Pope Paul VI as the "Continent of Hope".

To understand this is to value this reality and be called to share in its destiny. It means to achieve a profound identity with the people who are the protagonists in this historic process. It means being ready to redeem pain and suffering with love in the way that Jesus taught.

When we see the world our people inhabit, we see it as an affront to God in which millions of our children, youths, adults, and the elderly live under the mark of under-development.

The institutionalised violence, misery and oppression generate a dual reality, fruit of the political and economic systems that create injustice, sanctifying a social order that benefits only a few: the rich becomes ever richer at the expense of the poor who becomes ever poorer.

Confronting that reality - like the Catholic bishops at Puebla, like the Christians committed to the struggle for human rights, like all persons of goodwill - I want to share the anguish on the suffering face of the Latin American man or woman in whom we see the suffering face of Christ, our Lord, questioning us.

As I speak to you, I see before my eyes the vivid images of my brothers and sisters:

    – faces of the workers and peasants living at sub-human levels, whose rights to organise are severely limited;
    – faces of children who suffer from malnutrition;
    – of young people who see their hopes frustrated;
    – of the marginal urban poor;
    – of our indigenous people;
    – of the mothers searching for their missing sons and daughters;
    – of the disappeared, many of them mere children;
    – of thousands of exiles;
    – of the people who clamour for liberty and justice of all.

In spite of so much suffering and pain, I live in hope because I feel that Latin America is a continent on the rise. Its liberation may be delayed but never denied.

We live in hope because, like St. Paul, we believe that love never dies. Human beings in the historical process have created enclaves of love with their active practice of solidarity throughout the world, with the goal of the full liberation of humanity.

For me it is essential to have the inner peace and serenity of prayer in order to listen to the silence of God, which speaks to us in our personal life and the history of our times, of the power of love.

Because of this faith in Christ and humankind, we must apply our humble efforts to build a more just and humane world. I want to affirm emphatically: such a world is possible.

To create this new society we must reach out our hands, fraternally, without hatred and rancour, for reconciliation and peace, with unfaltering determination in the defense of truth and justice.

We know we cannot plant seeds with closed fists. To sow we must open our hands.

I want to thank all of you and the Nobel Committee for this high distinction given the humble people of Latin America. I am deeply moved and even more committed to redouble my efforts in the struggle for peace and justice.

We know that peace is only possible when it is the fruit of justice. True peace is a profound transformation by means of the force of nonviolence that is the power of love.

I would like to tell you that, thanks to the support and understanding of my wife and children even in the hardest and most difficult moments of this struggle, I could continue this work together with my brothers and sisters of Latin America. With my family's love, silence and solidarity they have always helped to give me strength and courage to serve my brothers and sisters.

Invoking the strength of Christ, our Lord, I would like to share with you, with my people, and with the world what He has taught us in the Sermon on the Mount:

    Blessed are the poor in spirit;
    – theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
    Blessed are the gentle;
    – they shall inherit the earth.
    Blessed are they who mourn;
    – they shall be comforted.
    Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness;
    – they shall be satisfied.
    Blessed are the merciful;
    – they shall obtain mercy.
    Blessed are the pure in heart;
    – they shall see God.
    Blessed are the peacemakers;
    – they shall be called children of God.
    Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake;
    – theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
    Blessed are you when people abuse you and persecute you and speak all kinds of falsehoods against you for my sake.
    Rejoice and be glad, for great will be your reward in heaven. In the same way they persecuted the prophets before you.

(Matthew 5, 1-12)

Receive my deep gratitude and my wish for peace and well-being.