Some Aspects of the Mission of the International Committee of the Red Cross

The International Committee of the Red Cross, being an institution unique of its kind, I feel I should say a few words about what it is and what its activities are. It is a private, independent body, composed only of Swiss citizens.

At the present time there are eighteen members who were recruited by co-optation, that is to say invited by the Committee itself, to become members. The International Committee is, therefore, completely national by composition, but international in its mission.

This is not a contradiction.

The International Committee is admitted on the territory of belligerents for the sole reason that its members are citizens of a small country, with no political ambitions but with a tradition of complete neutrality. Governments can, therefore, have full confidence in its impartiality.

The International Committee has no material power. It has no arms and would not even know how to resort to diplomatic maneuver. But its apparent weakness is offset by its moral authority. For just one hundred years now, governments have considered the existence of the International Committee useful.

They expect it to carry out tasks which cannot be accomplished by anyone else.

They know that, in a world where selfish or ideological interests are in conflict, one institution alone stands apart from struggles of this nature, even in the climax of war, and that it will always act, without any thought of self-interest, in complete independence and in obedience to its belief that suffering, being a cruel reality, must be alleviated without prejudice of any kind.

The practical activities of the International Committee are threefold: protection of war victims, information on missing persons, relief in countries afflicted by war.

To discharge its first function of giving protection, the International Committee sends out delegates, who are all Swiss also, to the countries at war, particularly in order to visit prisoner-of-war camps and ensure humane treatment to those who are held captive. These delegates watch over the situation in the detention quarters, diet, medical care, working and living conditions.

They interview prisoners without witness. Detailed reports are then sent to the detaining power and to the government of the prisoner's country of origin. The delegates submit on the spot requests for any necessary improvements. If need be, the International Committee itself takes the matter up with the higher authorities, using the principle of reciprocity as a lever to achieve its aim.

During the Second World War the International Committee's delegates carried out some eleven thousand camp visits.

The Geneva Conventions of 1949 added strength to the International Committee in its role as the protector of prisoners of war.

These Conventions1 extended its field of activity to all civilians who might be interned, in time of war, for any reason whatsoever, and the camps - I mean the concentration camps - where they are interned are now also open to inspection.

To carry out its second function of supplying information on missing persons, the International Committee has been entrusted with setting up and running the Central Tracing Agency for prisoners of war and civilians.

This Agency communicates to anxious families news of their kin, held captive or who are missing. During the last World War, the Agency assembled some forty million information cards.

It brought news to as many as six thousand families a day.

The Agency is now a permanent establishment.

Furthermore, the Committee manages the International Tracing Service at Arolsen, in the Federal Republic of Germany, whose duty it is to supply information on persons missing from concentration camps and, also, to issue certificates of incarceration to those who survived. A staff of over two hundred and fifty persons is necessary for this colossal task.

The third aspect of the Committee's work is to supply material relief.

During the Second World War it distributed, to the camps in which Allied soldiers were detained in Germany, for instance, relief in the form of food, clothing, medical supplies, and books, to a value of some three and a half billion Swiss francs. In order to transport this material through the blockade, the International Committee had to organize a fleet of fourteen ships which sailed the seas under the Red Cross flag.

Since the war this activity has continued. Two examples are the supplies to Hungary, at the time of the 1956 uprising2, and, at the present time, the setting up, in the heart of the Arabian desert, of a field hospital, in order to bring relief to the victims of the cruel war of which the Yemen is the theatre3.

 

But there are also tasks of a more general order which the International Committee has to perform.

It is the recognized guardian of the Red Cross ideal. It must, therefore, exercise vigilance to ensure respect for humanitarian principles: non discrimination, independence, and neutrality, which are the common heritage of our universal movement.

Yet a further, primary duty is to work for the development of international humanitarian law which protects the human person in the time of war. As early as 1864, the International Committee persuaded governments to conclude the first Geneva Convention4 for - as its title indicates the Amelioration of the Condition of the Sick and Wounded in the Field.

This treaty was strengthened in 1929 by a second Convention, relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War. This Convention affected the lives of millions of captives during the Second World War. In order to demonstrate its usefulness, let me say that wherever it was applied the mortality rate did not exceed ten percent!

In the concentration camps for civil prisoners - where the Committee's delegates never penetrated, despite repeated appeals to Hitler himself - the mortality rate was as high as ninety percent!

That is why it was absolutely necessary to revise and extend these Conventions. This was done in 1949 when two new Conventions were also drawn up.

The first of these brought humanitarian protection to the victims of war at sea, whilst the second - of capital importance - extended it to civilians. In fact, despite all the efforts of the International Committee, no complete, up-to-date Convention to protect civilians was in force when the Second World War broke out. Civilians were, therefore, in some countries, subject to deportation and even to extermination!

This tragic gap has now been bridged. Civilians have been given the status and the guarantees which were previously so cruelly lacking. They are now entitled to treatment of at least the same standard as that which is given to prisoners of war.

What is even more important is that this fourth Convention, as well as the three others, contains a common article, which is revolutionary in international law.

This is Article Three.

It gives certain guarantees to combatants in civil wars. It prohibits the taking of hostages and summary executions without fair trial. It lays down humane conditions of internment and the right to protection by the International Committee.

Article Three has enabled the International Committee to intervene in the civil wars which have ravaged various countries during the past fifteen years. I am thinking, more particularly, of the subcontinent of India at the time of its division into two great countries: India and Pakistan. Also in Latin America, Algeria, Vietnam, Laos, and recently again, in the Congo.

The new Geneva Conventions were soon signed and ratified by nearly every country in the world. Ninety-eight governments have ratified so far. The International Committee has drawn up detailed commentaries of these Conventions.

It has also undertaken to ensure their diffusion, for they must be known to all those who will be called upon to apply them.

Here in Oslo, two years ago, I explained how the International Committee's mission has developed in civil wars. I shall, therefore, not dwell on this point. I would, however, like to add a further example to those I have just mentioned.

It is a venture, the scene of which is set in the burning sands of Arabia and the Yemen, where civil war is raging.

These are the only regions in the world where the Red Cross and the Geneva Convention have not yet penetrated, But they are doing so now, little by little.

This exploration in unknown territory, I assure you, is most exalting. Indeed, the heads of the two opposing forces have decided to give up their traditional practice of slaughtering the vanquished.

And now, for my example. A sheikh in the desert found himself suddenly face to face with an enemy officer. In the course of the fight both were wounded, but the sheikh, who was less seriously hurt, was able to bandage the wounds of his opponent. He leant over the man who a moment before had sought to kill him and took care of him. Then he brought him as his prisoner to his own tribe. But there, all his family and warrior friends insulted him, urging him to put the enemy to death. "If you are a man, prove it!" shouted his mother. But the sheikh was steadfast and delivered his prisoner to his king. Thus a life - and several hundred others - was saved, and the flag of the Red Cross flies over the mysterious landscapes of Arabia.

There is a point I would like to make here in connection with the intervention of the United Nations in civil wars, not only in the Yemen, but also, for instance, at the frontiers of Israel and in the Congo.

It may be presumed that they will be called upon, more and more frequently, to maintain or to reestablish peace and that the troops they send for that purpose may sometimes be in action in the trouble spots of the world.

The United Nations Organization, as such, is not, however, a party to the Geneva Conventions.

Already, in 1956 immediately after the Suez crisis5, the International Committee made known to the late - and regretted - Mr. Hammarskjöld6, its concern with this question. It repeated this in 1960, when the United Nations acted in the Congo. Each time the Committee received the assurance that the United Nations intended to observe the broad principles - that was the word used - of the Geneva Conventions. But incidents which resulted in the tragic death of three Red Cross workers, including an International Committee delegate, proves that the problem is far from being solved.

It was again raised at the Centenary Congress of the International Red Cross which was held this summer in Geneva. The Congress passed a unanimous resolution. I give you the essential passages:

(a) "The Council of Delegates - of the International Red Cross - recommends: that the United Nations be invited to adopt a solemn declaration, accepting that the Geneva Conventions equally apply to their Emergency Forces, as they apply to the forces of States parties to the said Conventions;

(b) That the Governments of countries providing contingents to the United Nations should, as a matter of prime importance, give them before departure from their country of origin, adequate instruction on the Geneva Conventions, as well as orders to comply with them..."

In this way, the International Committee hopes that this important question will be brought to a satisfactory conclusion, thanks to the goodwill of all concerned.


Despite the great extension of the Geneva Conventions they still do not cover the whole field of human suffering. We have just seen that, since 1949, there exists an Article Three, common to all four Geneva Conventions, for the protection of the victims of civil wars. This article, however, is only applicable in the event of armed conflicts, but governments often deny the existence of such conflicts on their territory.

The International Committee is, therefore, trying to extend the scope of humanitarian law further still. The first objective is to bring assistance to persons interned in their own countries as a result of internal tensions.

Here the International Committee is on difficult ground.

Indeed, this raises the problem of intervention in matters affecting national sovereignty or the superior interests of the state.

Today, individuals are often treated in their own countries less favorably than enemy soldiers captured with weapons in their hands. Paradoxically, therefore, it seems that humanitarian law might, sometimes, be applied to the domestic affairs of states.

Experts of international renown, consulted by the Committee, have recognized the legitimacy of the intervention of the Red Cross in this particular field. They laid down a definition of humane treatment which should be applied to detainees in such cases. On the basis of this, the Committee has been able to act, in the course of disturbances or troubles, in several countries on the American, African, and Asian continents. Thus law and fact, theory and practice, give support the one to the other and to the work of the Red Cross.

But there is a greater problem still: the evolution of war towards an ever increasingly "total" form. It approaches this climax through the development of aviation and explosives, via systematic bombing, V-two, and napalm to the hydrogen bomb, which threatens to destroy all humanity and civilization.

The rules of air warfare, drawn up in 1907 and laid down in the Hague Conventions7, were already, at the time of the first air raid in 1911, outmoded and buried beneath the ruins of the towns laid waste.

But governments, in the face of the menacing progress of nuclear physics, are doing nothing to revise and restore these regulations.

The International Committee had, therefore, the duty to do something. It proceeded from the fact that the wholesale bombing of towns during the Second World War did not "pay" from a purely military point of view. Indeed, in the bombed industrial regions, factories never ceased work and even increased production. If governments, therefore, do not admit that total, indiscriminate war is criminal, they will, perhaps, heed the argument that it is not good tactics.

The International Committee has had an idea which may perhaps provide the key to the problem: It should not concentrate its effort against any particular weapon, such as the atom bomb, as this would go unheeded by governments and would, in any case, be insufficient. What must be done is to oppose a particular form of war.

In fact, the bombing of Hamburg resulted in as many victims as the bombing of Hiroshima.

Once a weapon is prohibited, an even more frightful one will be invented to take its place. In the French village of Oradour, where the entire population was burnt alive in the church, the weapon was a mere box of matches!

The principle to be established is, therefore, that whatever weapons are employed, the civilian population must not be harmed or at least not exposed to risks out of all proportion to the military objectives.

With the assistance of experts, the International Committee drew up draft regulations which were approved, in principle, by the last International Red Cross Conference in 1957.

This draft was then communicated to governments.

But alas, the answer was silence! The time was, perhaps, not ripe. The Red Cross, however, never lets itself be discouraged. When one door is closed, it seeks to open others.

We shall not abandon our intention of protecting the civilian population.

 

In autumn, 1962, the International Committee was asked to act and to step beyond the limits of its traditional mission. This was during the Cuban crisis8. You will recall that the world was then on the brink of disaster.

War was liable to break out from one minute to the next -a "press button" war, involving extermination on a massive scale, by remote-controlled thermonuclear rockets.

Faced by this ghastly prospect, the United Nations turned to the International Committee as the only organization still, perhaps, able to maintain peace.

It was asked to set up a system to control the ships bound for Cuba, to ensure, through a force of some thirty inspectors, that no long-range atomic weapons were being delivered to Cuba.

The International Committee did not see how it could refuse to undertake this task.

Indeed, when the Red Cross movement codified the "Red Cross principles" in 1961, defining , its fundamental doctrine, an additional duty was embodied, that is, to promote mutual understanding, friendship, cooperation and a lasting peace amongst all peoples.

No one intended this principle to remain a dead letter.

So it came about that, in the grave tensions of the Cuban crisis, the International Committee was called upon to perform a task which it alone perhaps could undertake: to maintain peace in the world.

For at least two days there was every reason to fear the worst, that a conflict breaking out under these conditions would soon become an atomic war which would inevitably have caused the loss of millions of human lives, inflicted untold suffering and terrible destruction.

At the same time, the Red Cross itself was likely to see its work reduced to nought or rendered impossible.

The International Committee mustered all the conditions which its experience and the principle of neutrality demanded. The first step was to obtain the consent of the three parties concerned - the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba - which was given.

The International Committee, thereupon, delegated one of its members to the United Nations. There he examined, with the Secretary-General, the further conditions for possible action by the Committee: among others that there be a real threat of atomic war and that the International Committee be in a position to give its assistance, in an effective manner, within the framework of the Red Cross principles.

These principles are consistent with those of international public law. One of the most important of the latter principles is the freedom of the high seas. That is why the International Committee also laid down the prior condition that the control which it was called upon to carry out be accepted by all maritime powers whose ships call at Cuba.

Had this last condition been better known by the public at large, the opposition to the International Committee's intervention, which was raised in several countries having large merchant fleets, would certainly have been withdrawn.

Tension over Cuba subsided without the International Committee's having to intervene in fact. But the Committee's cooperative attitude facilitated the easing of tension.

By contributing to the maintenance of peace, it remained faithful to its mission.

 

Every institution, like every individual, should contribute to the crusade for peace, with the means at its disposal, The Red Cross, for its part, struggles against war by making it less inhuman; does it not rescue war victims, even on the battlefield? But, given the present state of the world, it cannot pretend to be able to eliminate the scourge of war; it therefore tries to alleviate its evils.

By promoting the first Geneva Convention, the Red Cross dealt war one of the first and most serious blows it has ever received. In August, 1864, states sacrificed a fraction of their sovereignty for the benefit of human needs. This was the price paid in order to force a breach in the ancestral hatred of man for man. War gave ground to law.

The first Geneva Convention, which was revolutionary at the time, is the basis of all humanitarian law which aims at protecting the victims of hostilities. Within a century, the mortality rate of wounded on the battlefield fell from sixty percent to two percent. These figures speak louder than words.

The impetus created by this Convention resulted in the conclusion of the Hague Conventions which govern the conduct of hostilities and restrict the use of certain weapons9.

On the moral plane also, the Red Cross promotes understanding amongst peoples by developing an active sense of brotherhood and by promoting a feeling of mutual responsibility for the good of mankind. The Red Cross knows better than anyone the wounds caused by war, for it is the Red Cross which heals those wounds; it reveals to men the hideous aspect of war and turns them from it.

The achievements of the Red Cross have a symbolic value and stand out as an example. Its accomplishments at the height of battle are acts of peace.

When war creates its tragic gap between nations, the Red Cross remains the last link. Its struggle against suffering is a vivid reproach to those who inflict it. It intervenes in the midst of violence but does not have recourse thereto. The Red Cross, therefore, makes a powerful appeal to all men in favor of peace.


Your Majesty, Your Royal Highness, Ladies and Gentlemen.

It is my great privilege to express, to the Nobel Committee of the Norwegian Parliament, the deep gratitude of the International Committee of the Red Cross, in Geneva, for the high distinction it has received.

All my colleagues, on the International Committee, have asked me to tell you that the award of the Nobel Peace Prize is for them, and for all those who work with them, a powerful incentive to pursue their difficult, though stimulating, task.

Allow me to add that, since my youth I have been a witness to the support given, by the Nobel Foundation, to the cause of peace. Having entered the service of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, in nineteen twenty-one already, I knew those unselfish, courageous, apostles of peace, who often braved the distrust of governments, and who were chosen for honour by your illustrous Committee: the Frenchman, Frederic Passy – who shared the Prize with Henri Dunant –, the Swiss Ducommun and Gobat; the Dane Frederick Bajer; the Swede Branting; the Norwegian Christian Lange and others also. Behind these leaders, the great masses of the people were also encouraged to pursue the same path and the same ideal.

Did Alfred Nobel foresee, in his generosity, that his admirable gesture would have such remarkable results? I cannot say! But in any case we can now pay to his memory a proper tribute of admiration and gratitude. I wish to associate – in this tribute – the Nobel Institute, whose publications are of the very greatest historical, social and legal value. I shall only mention one of these numerous publications: "The History of Internationalism", the first volume of which was written by my predecessor, at the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Christian Lange, an outstanding representative of Norwegian democracy.

That the International Committee of the Red Cross – already twice distinguished by your Committee – has been called upon to share, with its sister organization, the League of Red Cross Societies, the Nobel Peace Prize for the year nineteen sixty-three, is highly significant. Indeed, in nineteen seventeen and nineteen fourty four, the immense task accomplished by the International Committee of the Red Cross and – let us not forget it – by the National Societies also, during the two Great Wars, was known throughout the world. The Nobel Peace Prize symbolized the gratitude of untold millions.

Now, the Prize awarded this year, in nineteen sixty three, comes as a reward for the tasks accomplished by the International Committee since the end of the last World War. It is a task of which the public is hardly aware, its significance is, however, considerable. Indeed, the International Committee has been called upon to help the victims, no longer of major international conflicts, but of civil wars which are often crueller still. In order to carry out this activity, the International Committee had to intervene between the legitimate governments – or those who considered themselves such – and those who had rebelled against the established order. No government opposed the International Committee on the ground of the sovereignty of the State, none contested the Red Cross the right to go to the relief of the victims of armed conflicts.

Thus, the principles of our movement have penetrated into fresh fields, where previously only might was right. New barriers have been erected against the resort to violence and new prospects opened to the mission for peace.

I venture to say, without false modesty, that in awarding the Nobel Peace Prize, for nineteen sixty three, to the International Committee and to the League, the Nobel Committee of the Norwegian Parliament, is well deserving of peace.



The Red Cross in a Changing World

To this hall tonight have been invited men and women representative of the four corners of our world. Each person present has rendered some service to the cause of peace. Such an undertaking imposes humility and suggests that we speak simply to this world forum about the common purpose that concerns us all.

Goodwill is often inarticulate. Fortunately, we are blessed with individuals and organizations to express the longings of little peoples in all lands. The gift of great and continuing institutions is a splendid gift. We are "inheritors of a tradition", and in our hands is responsibility that the lustre does not dim, nor the shadow shrink.

Before making any reference to the League of Red Cross Societies, I would like to speak in the highest terms of the work which has been done for the past one hundred years by the International Committee of the Red Cross and for the work it continues to carry on ever with increased fervor. The International Committee is that great body of Swiss citizens which acts as intermediary between belligerents in the time of war, and as arbitrators of disputes in time of peace. To quote Mr. Boissier, president of the International Committee, at the inauguration ceremony1 of the Centenary of the Red Cross, "The International Committee will endeavor, with untiring perseverance, to obtain universal acceptance and application of the Geneva Conventions. These conventions, instruments fashioned and perfected by experience, were forged to protect and save innocent victims of war. Each victim is considered as a separate entity and assisted in his individual suffering, from which it is necessary to save him by stretching out a helping hand. In this fashion, the text of the Convention is transformed into a veritable causeway along which representatives from Geneva travel to bring comfort and perhaps salvation to the wounded or imprisoned."

The League of Red Cross Societies was founded on May 5, 1919. The League is described in its constitution as the International Federation of National Red Cross Societies, an association of unlimited duration having the legal status of a corporate body. In referring to National Red Cross Societies, the constitution also and equally refers to the corresponding National Societies of the countries using in the place of the Red Cross the other emblems recognized by the Geneva Conventions, namely the Red Crescent, and the Red Lion and Sun2.

National Societies emerged and developed as a direct consequence of the attitude and philosophy of Henri Dunant. The first National Society was founded in 1863. For the realization of his dreams, he proposed the formation of relief societies which would always be available for the performance of an ever increasing number of tasks. His ideas respecting the function of relief committees were conveyed in his own words as follows:

"To render great services by their permanent existence during periods of epidemics, floods, great fires, and other unforeseen disasters; the philanthropic spirit which brought them into being would prompt them to action in all circumstances where they could be of service."3

This year, Red Cross celebrated its centenary. The Red Cross begins its second century with 102 active National Red Cross Societies, comprising approximately 170,000,000 individual members of local societies. Fourteen of these National Societies became members of the League of Red Cross Societies during the last meeting of the Board of Governors held in Geneva in August, 1963. The formation throughout the world of new National Societies gives increased vitality, a deeper and more realistic meaning to the Red Cross principles of universality, humanity, and impartiality. These National Societies are all working according to principles laid down in Geneva one hundred years ago by the founding fathers of Red Cross. Thus have the humanitarian ideas of one man, Henri Dunant, taken root and flourished.

Red Cross members, unified in their own National Societies and federated in the League, belong to something more significant than a series of benevolent societies. These individuals are guided by international agreements and basic humanitarian principles which give their work a special significance. The League represents millions of voluntary workers, to whom the movement owes an extreme debt of gratitude. The officers of the League have the honor of representing these volunteer members on this very important occasion.

The League of Red Cross Societies, the National Societies of Red Cross, and the members of all National Societies regard with pride the history of the Red Cross, and anticipate with confidence and humility the great new tasks which are ahead. They remember with thankful respect the founding fathers of the International Red Cross.

What does the future hold for the Red Cross? Whatever the developments may be in the world in the coming decades, there will be a tremendous opportunity for this humanitarian organization. Without changing its principles, it must adapt itself to a changing world. There will be a great responsibility for the League and for the National Societies.

"We are a civilization which knows how to make War, but no longer knows how to make Peace", the Italian Guglielmo Ferrero wrote in his book, The Problem of Peace. During the past ten years this provocative declaration has been tested by partial and localized conflicts in many parts of the world. There is a condition of continuous tension arising from the antagonism of ideologies and the fear of a world war. And yet, there is not a person in the world who does not yearn for peace. What then, in the twentieth century, in this world which is a prey to the most violent convulsions and to the most unexpected upheavals, are the ways to create a climate of understanding and fraternity between men? How do we learn to make peace?

As the seventeenth International Conference of the Red Cross affirmed in Stockholm in 1948, "The history of mankind shows that the campaign against the terrible scourge of war cannot achieve success if it is limited to the political sphere." The Red Cross, to which quite special appeals have been made in these last ten years, has demonstrated that it is one of the rare institutions capable of marshaling great numbers of men and women, and the necessary material resources, to action for peaceful purposes. It has made a contribution to development of a climate of agreement over and above all ideological, racial, and religious considerations. The Red Cross has always devoted itself to ignoring the antagonisms, whatever they may be, in order to unite all men in one and the same movement of solidarity.

Since its founding in 1919, the League has sent out 168 appeals for international help. The response has not been only from a few prosperous societies. Every society, large or small, young or old, rich or poor, responds to the call for help with eagerness and generosity. After the recent Agadir disaster4, where 17,000 people were killed and 1,700 injured, sixty-one Red Cross Societies participated in relief work. From all comers of the globe teams of surgeons, doctors, and nurses made every effort to bring relief to the victims. Foodstuffs and medicaments were provided to a total value of millions of Swiss francs. Following the disaster emergency, the reconstruction of a hospital complex in Agadir remains as a memorial of Red Cross cooperation.

The list of disasters in the last ten years is impressive. It illustrates the distress of populations who require continuous relief in many instances for several months. To a greater extent than any other body, the League has been called upon to devote its attention to the fate of needy populations and to draw up long-term programs, often at the request of UN specialized agencies, and even governments. Within the broad plan "each victim is considered as a separate entity and assisted in his individual suffering, from which it is necessary to save him by stretching out a helping hand".

The paralysis epidemic in Morocco in 1959 presented the League with the opportunity of bringing relief to a population and demonstrating the solidarity of this world movement. Everyone recalls the innocent consumption of adulterated cooking oil by a section of the Moroccan population5. There were 10,466 paralysis victims, but after training centers were set up, manned by expert personnel for a period of eighteen months, all but 120 were rehabilitated and orthopedic surgery was arranged for these. In the midst of the disturbances, doctors from Federal and Democratic Germany worked in the same operating theatres; Polish, Canadian, and Czechoslovakian nurses bandaged and treated the same patients, without discrimination.

Among distressed populations, there is a category of people who are most destitute among the destitute, namely the refugees. Often obliged to flee from their own countries, with no official status and with pride hurt, the refugees are left to their own devices. At this time when some countries are persecuting these human beings, and other countries ignoring them, the League, in pursuance of its principles of humanity and impartiality, rushes to their support. In 1956-1957, 180,000 Hungarians fled from their country. For eleven months the League, with the help of the Austrian and Yugoslav governments and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, devoted itself to coordinating relief and administering temporary camps. Millions of dollars were put to use in this vast operation, in which fifty-two National Societies participated, and for which the League received the Nansen medal.

The largest relief operation ever undertaken by the League remains without doubt the one from which 285,000 Algerian refugees benefited. These refugees, installed in Tunisia and Morocco from 1958 to 1962, received regular care from medical teams and were provided with foodstuffs and clothing. Fifty-seven National Societies made gifts during these four years to the total amount of 90,000,000 Swiss francs. This massive assistance was given until the repatriation of the refugees which was effected in 1962 under the auspices of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. And later, for some months, the League was engaged in a large scale program of assistance to two million needy Algerians.

The mission of the League is to bring relief on all fronts. One has only to recall the appeal of the League in 1960 to provide medical teams for the civilian hospitals of the Congo, the relief given to the Angolan refugees, and the medical care and foodstuffs provided for the Watusi tribes from Ruanda-Urundi, who were not only given assistance in the form of medical care and foodstuffs, but were also resettled and equipped.

These are only a few of the actions undertaken by the League during recent years. Others are too numerous to mention except by names-floods in Italy, The Netherlands, England, Belgium, and other countries; hurricanes in Thailand, Madagascar, the Caribbean; earthquakes in Japan, Iran, Turkey, and more recently, in Yugoslavia, where the city of Skoplje was destroyed in July, 1963. The League undertook to assist the Yugoslav Red Cross by providing 27,000 children and 3,000 mothers with food and clothing while their homes were being rebuilt.

These examples illustrate this vast movement of solidarity, which the League always tries to promote and develop between nations. The generosity of National Societies, which between 1950 and 1960 contributed to eighty-eight relief actions to the extent of some sixty million dollars, is certainly not a negligible factor in the search for peace. In Austria, Chile, the Congo, and Viet Nam, men of all races and different ideologies have united their efforts, here to build a dispensary, there to set up a milk station, and everywhere to alleviate suffering. A great philosopher has said: "Force them to build a tower together and you will change them into brothers." This is the most important aspect. Specialists from all comers of the globe have studied together a rare illness. They have taken the measure of human suffering to find a remedy.

Even more than the thousands of cases of clothing and foodstuffs, with labels from many nations, which lie together in the holds of ships, these human contacts which the League does not cease to encourage are those that best contribute to the justification of its motto: "Per humanitatem ad pacem". Such is the great, the noble task which the League never ceases to pursue.

International mutual aid is not limited to the field of relief but includes also the development of other sister Societies. The League needs constantly to extend its network of humanitarian actions, and many new countries have recently gained their independence. The Red Cross Development Program is to promote by material and financial aid the organization and development of the different services to sister Societies in need of help. This program, dynamic and flexible enough to be adapted to local conditions, also aims at developing international understanding between sister Societies, between the old and the new. Study seminars and the loan of technical experts help to train the leaders of future Societies, or Societies recently founded.

The Junior Red Cross enables children, ignoring the quarrels of adults, to smile at each other across national borders: A symbol of this broad approach to international service and understanding is the "Henri Dunant House" in Woudschoten, near Zeist, in The Netherlands. Founded by teams of young people on the occasions of the disasters6 which struck Holland in 1953, it has become a house of solidarity-welcoming groups of handicapped adolescents.

It should not be forgotten that the meetings of the League bring peoples together and create better understanding. To these meetings all the National Societies send their representatives, and this serves not only to strengthen the links between members of the Red Cross but also to provide fruitful contact with statesmen who belong to the Red Cross and whose influence may be considerable. Thousands of families, the members of which were dispersed throughout the world as a result of the last war, have been reunited through contact with the National Societies.

On many occasions resolutions relevant to peace have been adopted by various Red Cross Conferences. In addition, the League has intervened directly to remedy to the extent possible the consequences of a conflict. Thus, in 1952 the League took the initiative in arranging semiofficial discussions between the Red Cross Societies of Japan and the People's Republic of China. In a few months, 30,000 Japanese detained in China were able to return to their country, thanks to the goodwill and understanding of these two societies. In December, 1952, following suspension of the armistice negotiations in Korea, the League appealed to the belligerents to take immediate steps, under the Geneva Conventions, to ensure repatriation of prisoners. The difficulties were immense, but the League's appeal prepared the way for a solution which, if it had been delayed for long, would have caused new and pointless suffering.

In 1955 the German Red Cross of the Federal Republic of Germany negotiated the repatriation of 11,000 Germans detained in Poland.

The League of Red Cross Societies launches through its activities a daily challenge to misery and despair. It succeeds when it establishes a field of understanding, where men of goodwill speak together in the spirit of human heart.

No finer homage has ever been paid to the League than by the late Mr. Dag Hammarskjöld7, secretary-general of the United Nations, when he declared: "The Red Cross, with its affiliated Red Crescent and Red Lion and Sun Societies, has become the symbol of complete impartiality in rendering help wherever help is needed. The technical achievements of the League have been outstanding, but even greater has been its work in strengthening the ideal of the human race as one family by translating into practical terms the humanitarian concern for the welfare of our fellow men."

Since the birth of the League, it has seen wars and major human catastrophes. The blind forces of nature have on many occasions overwhelmed the puny breastworks of man. In each and every instance, from every corner of the globe, the response came flooding in to meet the challenge.

It would be an impervious being who would not note that this outpouring of the spirit of helpfulness is not present in all the dealings between the scattered members of our human family. Many have been the attempts to scale the heights, or pierce the thick darkness, where Peace resides. History, civilized and primitive, is stained with the blood of those who had the determination to attain peace, or impose it upon their adversaries. Too often, idealism has found itself steeped in cruelty and twisted in hate. The path to Peace is deep in dead. The entrails of youth are strewn on our battlefields. What matters it to Death and Despair that our protestations are pure, and our declared motives blameless.

In such a world it is to be wondered that the Red Cross has survived. Is it merely that a referee is needed who will serve as liaison and be impartial? Is there place for a doctor who will stanch the bleeding of those who may still be saved? Is it merely as a convenience of the combatants that Red Cross is able to penetrate the exclusions of nationalism to keep alive the fact of mercy? Is Red Cross in wartime a flickering flame to remind us of our continuing brotherhood? Is it a gesture to declare, despite appearances, that we are derived from the Godhead; that we may lay waste our bodies but cannot cast aside, entirely, our souls?

It is this contrast between the work of the Red Cross in peace and in war that provides an endless fascination. In peace, it is the strong support of beneficent service, and in emergencies a wave and pillar of succor for the distressed. In war, it is a liaison, a medium of practical help to the wounded and the prisoner, a symbol that beyond the knives and guns, the larks and the angels are watching.

Why is it that the Red Cross must work in two such disparate worlds? How is it that the same people who rush to the relief of the stranger in a peacetime emergency will grant merely treaty rights in time of war? These rights have been hard won and have yielded important returns in the relief of suffering. But it is the contrast in moods that is impressive.

The Red Cross, acting on behalf of mercy, touches a vibrant chord of out-welling sympathy that stretches from land to land, from black to white, red to yellow, from creed to creed, from heart to heart. There is no delay, no finely weighed counting up of plus and minus, no calculation of the terms of trade, or estimate of what we get for what we give. It is like the mechanism of the human body responding to an infection; like a human family pooling its resources for the member who has met catastrophe.

Perhaps we do not live in two worlds. Rather we live in a divided world where we alarm our neighbors with terrible threats, and evoke the horrors of retaliation. That very same world and those very same people are ready to rush to the aid of those very same neighbors when nature lets loose her terrors. Great wells and springs of sympathy and understanding exist. They are tapped and made into reservoirs in times of need.

Happily, there is some evidence that the closing years of the twentieth century may see great progress made towards the goal of human brotherhood and away from the practices of hate and deception. You may be tolerant if we place before you certain of the reasons of our convictions, and even hopes:


(1) The expansion of knowledge about the world, the universe and man himself has shown how fascinating can be the discovery and enjoyment of this vast workshop and playroom. War and destruction are idiotic in circumstances where the potential is boundless for the sharing of achievement. Why quarrel over pebbles when we can share diamonds; why create destruction when we could be partners in abundance?

(2) The great religions of the world are indicating a realization that they are the keepers of a viewpoint about man and his meaning. Archaic arrogance and conflicting finalities are yielding to a nicer grasp of what matters and should be enshrined. The past is not being forsaken, it is being winnowed; the truth is not being abandoned, it is being rediscovered in modern terms; differences are not being disregarded, they are being reconciled. From this alchemy may come diminution of the estrangement of reason from belief, and the alienation of good men over suppositional certainties.

(3) The habit of cooperation is growing among the nations. The United Nations is a fact and a symbol for man's determination to talk and act together. Projects like the International Geophysical Year8 draw men from everywhere, together in furtherance of a common interest. The Thinkers Conference9, at Pugwash, Canada, could be proliferated in topics and place to great advantage. The Peace Corps10 and the Peace Institute11 have seeds of promise. Common interest is a common denominator and is the solution of many problems. Happily, there is more coming and going, and more understanding should be a consequence.

(4) The improvement in the means of communications and the increase in the resources for wealth creation have multiplied the capacity to help the less fortunate. Much has been said recently about the shortcomings of the colonial powers in the nineteenth century. It is clear that it is possible today to do more for backward peoples than in the days of sailing ships, and supply more than bare subsistence for the masses in the countries of Europe. Factories are springing up in Africa. Exchange students are numerous on university campuses, and these students will return to enrich their respective homelands.

(5) We are moving into a climate of world opinion where idealism is becoming practical politics, an acknowledged fact of life. It is no longer a subject to be discussed in hushed voice and undertaken, by a strange and select coterie, under penalty of ridicule. Young people who follow idealistic courses are no longer regarded as eccentric by their contemporaries. Idealism is no longer "far out"; it is approaching a norm. In this significant change many organizations and many individuals, moving in the slow step of time, have brought to bear their influence. The far comers of the earth are responding to the breath and the touch of brotherhood.


Here tonight, we can make entries in the ledger of hopeful trends. We will include our own auditor's notes of caution about the terrifying consequences of false or slanted propaganda; of how the ghosts of history can rise to haunt us; and that insane desires or even misunderstandings can loose the horrors of unlimited calamity.

We can take solace and courage from awareness that the good of all men is within our reach. Many forces are in motion. Is there any further way we can tip the balance in the tug between a Paradise Lost and a Paradise Gained?

It would seem that a practical gain might be achieved if we could set up an agreed international relationship between the resources we direct to the means of destruction, and those we direct to the relief of distress, the increase in well-being of the less fortunate, and the continued unveiling of nature. A friendly competition in getting a higher percent of our national resources used for human betterment might be an approach to a lower percent being used for destruction. Most human beings would rather relieve distress than create it.

A famous poet once inquired: "Where are the snows of yesteryear?"12 Perhaps we shall live to the day when men will ask : "Where are the hates of yesteryear?" For, in the long run, the power of kindness can redeem beyond the power of force to destroy. There is a vast reservoir of kindness that we can no longer afford to disregard.

The curtain is lifting. We can have Triumph or Tragedy - for we are the playwrights, the actors, and the audience. Let us book our seats for Triumph - the world is sickened of Tragedy.


Your Majesty, Your Royal Highness, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen.

This is a very important day in the history of the League of Red Cross Societies. By deciding to award the Nobel Peace Prize to the International Red Cross, the Nobel Peace Committee has paid tribute to, and has honoured, the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies, in fact, the entire organization which works on behalf of suffering humanity.

The League of Red Cross Societies in its constitution is described as the International Federation of National Red Cross Societies, an association of unlimited duration, having the legal status of a corporate body.

Henri Dunant, the founder of the Red Cross, raised his voice more than 100 years ago against barbarity, suffering and misery. National Societies emerged and developed as a direct consequence of his attitude and philosophy. In the realization of his dreams he proposed the formation of relief societies which would always be available for the performance of an ever-increasing number of new tasks. The year 1863 saw the birth of the first of these relief societies.

As a result of this call to service, the League has today some 102 recognized National Societies, with approximately 170,000,000 members, all working according to the principles laid down in Geneva by its founding fathers 100 years ago.

The first Peace Prize was given to that noble man, Henri Dunant, founder of the Red Cross. By awarding the 1963 Peace Prize to the International Red Cross, we believe it is your intention to praise the daily work of those brave men and women who take care of, the victims of natural disasters, the patient who needs blood, the child who lacks milk, the refugee in search of asylum, and of all those other people who are alone in the world.

In this spirit, our delegation receives this Nobel Peace Prize not only on behalf of the League, but also on behalf of all the National Red Cross, Red Crescent and Red Lion and Sun Societies and all their members, without whom the League would not exist. Indeed, without these millions of Red Cross workers, without their support, without the spirit of solidarity and devotion they have always shown, the League would never have been able to fulfill its coordinating mission in all the fields where man has need of man. Throughout the world, volunteers of different nationalities, races and ideologies unite in one and the same impulse to serve the same cause and thereby create a vast network of international agreement, a climate of understanding conducive to the establishment of a lasting peace.

We would like to pay tribute to the Norwegian Red Cross, one of the pillars of our organization. This country, after having suffered in its flesh and soul during the last War has rapidly become a nation, the generosity of which is admired by all. On every occasion it shows its extreme interest in bringing comfort to the underprivileged of the world, thereby following the example given them by that great Norwegian, Fritjof Nansen, the administrator of many Red Cross actions after the first War.

The relief actions of the League are as many testimonies of its solidarity. It assists in the development of new societies. It trains young people in a climate of friendship and service. The League will continue to serve men, to persuade them to extend a helping hand, to show them in the words of Sophocles that "they are born to love and not to hate each other."

We are deeply indebted to the Nobel Prize Committee for recognizing the contribution of the League towards Peace. We wish to pay tribute in the most eloquent terms to that great Swedish chemist and engineer, Alfred Nobel, who bequeathed his enormous fortune to the creation of prizes in so many scientific and literary fields and to the promotion of fraternity of nations and the abolition or diminution of standing armies.

Deeply moved, the League of Red Cross Societies wishes to express to the Nobel Prize Committee at this solemn moment its warm gratitude for this great tribute to its work, which is at the same time an invaluable encouragement to it in the pursuit of its mission.

