The International Service of the Society of Friends
Introduction

The Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded to two Committees of the Society of Friends. These have their headquarters in Philadelphia and London but are representative of the activities of Friends around the world, whether the line be drawn round the northern hemisphere from Scandinavia, through the American continent, Japan and China to India, or south from Great Britain, through western Europe, Africa, and Australia to New Zealand.

The Society of Friends had its origin in England three hundred years ago, but the zeal of early Friends quickly carried their faith overseas to many places, notably to the new communities of settlers in America. Consequently the larger groups of Friends are still found in Great Britain and the United States of America. Numerically the Society is small, only totalling approximately 150,000, but observers have often remarked that its influence is quite out of proportion to its numbers. We have undertaken the work in God's name and we humbly offer thanks to Him if it has borne abundant fruit. We also want to give public recognition with gratitude for the devoted work done by very many men and women, not members of the Society, who have united in service with us because they shared our attitude towards suffering humanity. Without their aid and a great deal of generous financial support from the public, the work done in the name of Friends would have been very limited. Besides this help the Society owes a great debt to the cooperation of other bodies such as the Norwegian Fredsvenners Hjelpetjeneste [Friends of Peace Relief Service] and similar organizations in other countries. With all these people we share the honour that has come to us in the award of the Prize, and we hope that in any future work we may still have their support.

Appreciation is always encouraging, and this award has brought to us much that is pleasurable, not only in the recognition but in the expressions of goodwill from many of our friends. This is stimulating at a time when the need in the world is growing greater and material resources at our disposal become less and more difficult to obtain. But there also comes a great sense of responsibility to respond to the confidence shown in us. We are very conscious of our human inability to make an adequate response and we pray for strength if God desires us to continue in the work.

Because this responsibility has been laid upon us, I wish today to ask your understanding of the principles that lie at the root of the Quaker attitude to service and to show the resulting effect on the work undertaken.
Religious Foundation of Service

The full title of our Society is The Religious Society of Friends. Indeed it was the religious fervour of our forebears that caused them to "tremble before the Lord" that early won them the nickname of Quakers from the verb to quake or tremble. This nickname is no longer applicable to Friends in their quiet worship, but the name has remained although it has lost its original meaning.

The Society was born in a period when much that bore the name of religion was corrupt and very far removed from the teaching of Christ, and in the unrest of the times men were seeking for the foundation truths that would give them freedom of spirit. For years the young George Fox1, founder of the Society of Friends, had been seeking this freedom with an ever increasing sense of hopelessness. He could find no help from the formalism of the church of his time, and its religious leaders used argument or subterfuge that left him more and more conscious of his own inability to find a solution to the evil of the world. In 1647 the burden was lifted from him, not by a conviction that he was without sin, but that within his own soul he had the God-given capacity for Christ-likeness; that within him he had a measure of the same love and life, of the same mercy and power and of the same divine nature. He spoke of this measure of the divine in man as the "Light of Christ within". He found that the spirit of Christ could speak directly to him and evoke within him the power to choose his way through the evil of life when he was willing to follow the light. He found too that this capacity lay within every man and that the light could shine through all men. This did not make him believe that all that men did was good; this was obviously untrue, but that there was within every man something fundamentally good that could be developed.

Upon this basic truth all the principles and actions of the Society of Friends are founded. Each man is seen as having intrinsic value, and Christ is equally concerned for the other man as for me. We all become part of the divine family, and as such we are all responsible for one another, carrying our share of the shame when wrong is done and of the burden of suffering. In this way a brotherhood is founded which renders impossible a lack of regard for others, and, as in a family circle, it is the weakest or the most in need that calls out the greatest desire to help; so the forgotten and suffering people of the world appeal to the hearts of Friends. It must not be thought that we flatter ourselves that we have this sense of oneness with humanity to such an extent that we are always alert to the needs of the situation, or that we have power to meet all the needs that we recognize. We do however believe that, in responding to the call of God by using the little sympathy that we have got, more will be given us. The great American Quaker, John Woolman2, who worked untiringly for the freedom of slaves, speaks of training oneself to "enter into the condition of others". For this reason Friends have been prominent in social reform and in relief in times of special emergencies.
Personal Relationships

If Friends are to enter into the condition of others, it will be seen that, when undertaking relief work, they are not satisfied when only administering large impersonal schemes of feeding, clothing, and housing, but naturally desire to have personal contact with those in need. If this work is to be done abroad, there is always a danger that foreigners entering a country intent on helping may by their enthusiasm impose methods that are alien to the tradition and background of the people. Friends have aimed at entering into the life of the people. Often they have lamentably failed, but we rejoice to know of one of our workers who, feeling estranged from the working people of Germany by reason of her relief-team status, served as a tram conductress for a week, living, eating, and sharing the problems of her comrades. Or of another English girl, a midwife, who has donned a sari and is living with her students in the slums of Calcutta, quietly living down bitterness and racial animosity, with the result that at a meeting of Hindu men a shy young Indian student-midwife faced the group and condemned the method of retaliation, pleading for forgiveness and tolerance.

The same principle of belief in others that leads to this intimate sharing of life for the sake of understanding and better cooperation also forms the basis of the democratic methods of the Society of Friends. We strive to find corporately the right course to take, and as true progress is the result of man falling in with the will of the Creator, thus the periods of worship are the centre of all the work. Here in silent waiting upon God we seek for direction and, in fellowship with each other, try to interpret His will, whether it be in the conduct of business, the planning of a relief project, or the unravelling of difficult problems of personal relationship. Even when our work lies with peoples of different or of no faith, we invite them to share this search for divine direction, and many find themselves thus strengthened.
Self-help and Voluntary Service

The desire that others should share the knowledge that there lies within themselves a potential answer to evil, leads Friends to aim to draw out from those with whom they are in contact the will to strive for the betterment of their own conditions. We are therefore more convinced of the rightness of our work when first-stage relief has given place to rehabilitation.

At the close of the Spanish Civil War in 1939, Friends found themselves crossing the Pyrenees into France with the streams of refugees. At first little could be done for these people beyond endeavouring to supply the bare necessities of life. The workers were too fully occupied searching for medical supplies, blankets, and food to get much personal touch with individual refugees. Even this kind of work can lead to helping individuals to make readjustments, but it was years before the opportunity came for the most constructive work to begin. Much unemployment and misery were caused by the great number of men who had been disabled by the war. A small workshop was therefore established by British and American Friends for the manufacture of artificial limbs. One by one, the disabled men found new hope as they were able to become independent; by means of special appliances they were employed in the factory itself.

Or again in 1943 in Bengal, a small company of Friends was stationed in Calcutta at the time of the devastating flooding of the Ganges Delta, quickly followed by the famine. The country people flocked into the city, believing that there they would find food, but instead they lay starving and dying on the pavements. The Quaker team saw that the only satisfactory solution to the problem was to persuade the people to return to their villages, but their usual means of livelihood had gone. They would need to be established there in some form of productive work so that they might buy their own rations and look forward to an independent future. Thus a small mixed team of Indians and Westerners went to live in one village in order to set up temporary canteens, stimulate the reconstruction of the native mud-and-thatch houses, and establish a cooperative weaving industry. Many of the people were widows and did not know the craft, but, with a supply of looms and a skilled teacher, they soon became proficient and the village could be left to re-establish its life. The small number of Quaker workers could not deal with the whole problem of Bengal's starving people, but by this and other demonstrations they helped to stimulate wider efforts of self-help.

It is usual for Quaker teams to try to lead people on from self-help towards the giving of voluntary service. Self-interest can re-establish a man's self-esteem, but it is only the first step towards the realization of the brotherhood of man in the sight of God. By sharing his goods and, better still, sacrificing his time and energy, he can break down barriers and enter into the lives of others, developing the good within himself. In China it has been traditional for scholars not to soil their hands with manual work; yet, in company with Friends from America, Britain, Canada, and New Zealand, parties of students from the Chinese universities have spent their vacations building, hauling, and making bricks with their own hands as they shared in the reconstruction of war and flood devastated areas. They acclaimed with enthusiasm the joy of manual labour when it was raised from the menial to service for others.
Across Barriers of Class, Politics, Race, or Creed

An illustration from Poland may help to show the way in which the appeal to the good in people can cut across deep-rooted prejudices and break down political, national, and credal enmities.

Owing to the circumstances of Polish history, the population is very mixed in some areas, and recent happenings make it easy for ancient enmities to be fanned into flame, with dire results. In a village where the population was composed of Poles, Mazurs, Russians, and Germans, who belonged to Catholic, Orthodox, and Lutheran faiths, the British and American Quaker relief team brought a consignment of clothing, but there was only enough for the most needy cases. It was clear that this gesture of goodwill might easily arouse jealousies that would lead to internal strife. The help of local people must be enlisted, but should the clothing be divided in proportion to the size of the different sections of the people and be distributed by sectional agencies, or could one committee be entrusted to do the whole work? The latter was chosen, for Friends desire to break down barriers and believe that working together with a common aim can bring unity. By personal persuasion the committee was organized, including amongst its members a Protestant Polish pastor, a Catholic Polish priest, the wife of the local militia commandant, a Russian Orthodox priest, and a Russian abbess of the sect of Old Believers. They worked hard and patiently for three weeks, impartially weighing up the merits of the claimants for help, and although the clothing was not distributed evenly between the parties, there were no accusations of discrimination afterwards. Is it from such small seeds that confidence between conflicting groups spring?

All of us have much that is primitive in us, and Friends do not ignore the fact that emotions cause gulfs between groups of people, but, because of their belief in the power of man to respond to the divine within him, Quakers know that difficulties can be resolved; so they are frequently led into places of tension. In a spirit of reconciliation they try to clear away misunderstanding.

In recent history there have been few cases where bitterness has been higher than in India. During the communal riots a small Quaker team, composed of one American, one Briton, a Hindu and a Moslem, the latter two friends of the Friends, went to a village where false rumours had caused the Moslem section of the community to attack the Hindus, driving them out, destroying and pillaging their homes. The first task was to persuade the Moslems that their Hindu neighbours for many years had been good members of the community, and next to convince the Hindus that it was safe to return. The team won the confidence of both sides by impartial distribution of supplies and medical service to all in need. Within a few weeks the contending parties had been reconciled, and the Hindus were coming back to their homes as the united community worked to repair the damage. Before the team withdrew, Moslems, Hindus, and Christians came together in united worship silently to offer thanks to God for the reconciliation.

In these situations of tension, women take an equal, and often a leading, part, for there is equality of sex in the Society of Friends. Some of the most daring projects have been undertaken by women who cared so deeply for their neighbours, even though they had never seen them, that God cast out their fear. As early as 1658 a young English woman, realizing that the whole of Europe was menaced by the Turkish Sultan's war threats, went alone, unarmed, across mountains and deserts to the heart of Turkey, where the young Sultan was encamped with his army. Here she delivered her message from God and was listened to as an ambassador, almost as a prophet, for, he said, no other would risk so much for his mission.

It was not only in the early days of the Society that women showed the strength that can overcome fear. In recent history, at the time of the entrance of an occupying army into one of the cities of Europe, a woman Friend believed that good lay even in the hearts of plundering troops. Although her young daughter was in the house, she trusted in beautiful music to draw out the best. She sat playing her piano whilst her neighbours crouched in fear in cellars. Her faith was justified: the soldiers stood around the house listening and, when they came to claim billets in her home, their rough manner had departed. And even on subsequent occasions, when they returned drunk at night, she won their respect and good behaviour by her music.
Positive Peace Program

Most of my illustrations have been drawn from the emergency work of Friends, but there are less spectacular outcomes of our belief that all men belong to the family of God. This conviction necessarily leads us to believe that all war is wrong. It is therefore not enough to make efforts to repair the damage that it does, but there must be positive methods used to appeal to the intellectual reasonableness of man. There must be understanding of the problems of relationships, and men must learn to live "in the life and power which takes away the occasion of all wars". Friends will be found active in adult and youth education, but perhaps their unique contribution in the intellectual field of peacemaking has been made through the Friends' International Centres. Over a period of twenty-seven years these have been established in many of the great cities of Europe and at some of the international crossroads of the East. The aim of such Centres is one of reconciliation and creative peacemaking, and a great variety of activities have resulted. Here men and women can come, seeking together the truths of the spirit, and find freedom of converse on neutral ground where conflicting views can be discussed in friendship. These Centres are staffed by people drawn from at least three and sometimes more countries and in themselves demonstrate the possibility of international understanding when united by the same spirit. From them Quaker ambassadors of peace can go out to plead with authorities or act as reconcilers in times of crisis.

As I have picked out one example after another, I have been conscious that many of them reveal methods and motives shared by all people of goodwill, and the Society of Friends makes no claim to the monopoly of any of them; rather would we proclaim the universality of the truth that binds us together and pray that the day may quickly come when all men will seek first the Kingdom of God.



Your Majesty, Your Royal Highness, friends,

It is with sincere gratitude and great humility that I accept the Nobel Peace Prize on behalf of the Friends Service Council. In so doing I am officially representing the international work of the Religious Society of Friends in Great Britain and Ireland, which also includes Australia and New Zealand. By reason of my temporary office as chairman of the Council, it has fallen to my lot to receive the honour, but I am glad to know that Henry Cadbury and I are standing for a circle of Friends in almost every country of the world. Although we speak in many languages, we are intimately linked in a common faith and in endeavouring to express our principles in daily life. The Society of Friends is proud of its tradition and the faithfulness of its forebears, and it is clear today that the Nobel Committee has honoured this generation in the light of their tradition as peacemakers.

The Quakers, as the members of the Society of Friends are familiarly called, hold their views on peace not merely as a protest against war but because of their basic faith in the potential Christ-likeness in every man, resulting in an attitude of life that makes peace a necessary and natural outcome. This is a very high ideal.

Quakers are very ordinary people and they are prone to all the ordinary temptations caused by the primitive emotions of human life. There are many times when individuals fall below their own standards, but the strength given to the whole group has enabled the Society to maintain its peace testimony throughout the three hundred years of its existence.

Today as we live in the shadow of two great wars, we are all conscious not only of the horror of war itself, but of all the aftermath of human misery - starvation, homelessness, and many other forms of physical suffering. We know too of the greater evils of lowered morality, bitterness, violence and self-interest that sow the seeds of misunderstanding and strife. Seeing all this, the Society of Friends is humbled when it realises how little it has accomplished; but the receipt of the award is exhilarating. This recognition of endeavour must serve to stimulate greater effort.

There is always a danger that the ideal of peace becomes merely the negative to war. In the history of the Society of Friends there have been many occasions when resistance in the name of peace has been necessary. Quakers have suffered imprisonment and even death for their insistence that war is wrong and their refusal to take part in it. By this means they have won greater tolerance but the more difficult work is yet to be done. War will not cease until mankind has learnt the positive nature of peace. We speak of the present and the between-the-war period as "peace-time" but we all know that it would be truer to describe the condition as the period when there is no official warfare. There is not peace in the minds of men and there will not be until we have replaced misunderstanding by sympathy - fear by trust - jealousy and hatred by love. This is a very difficult job when thought of on the world-wide scale, but it is not so difficult when we think in terms of individual responsibility. This is the task before us, not only of the Society of Friends but of all mankind. Love is very infectious and if Quakers have started the infection they will rejoice.



Quakers and Peace

Before I give my address, I want to express on behalf of Miss Backhouse and myself a word of gratitude for the very warm hospitality we have received here this week. This September I crossed the Atlantic together with one hundred Americans who had been here in Oslo either at the summer school or at the Youth Conference and I knew then what the hospitality of the Norwegians was like from the warm words of appreciation that those young people gave as I talked to them.

Near my home in Massachusetts - perhaps a quarter of a mile from my house - there is a marble stone, and on this stone there is an inscription which says that near this spot Leif Eiriksson landed in Vineland in the year 10001. This may not be the exact place nor does anyone know how the American natives, if there were any, treated your fellow countryman in the year 1000. But I know that 947 years later I have returned his visit from Massachusetts. I know where I am today and how the natives have treated me here. One hundred years and more ago there were a few Quakers in parts of Norway that were not treated this way. They were imprisoned, they were driven out, they were persecuted. About half of them began to migrate to America and they were the leaders, the first of a long procession of Norwegian settlers in America, beginning with the famous sloop "Restaurationen" in 1825, and continuing with other ships in 1836-1837. They have supplied perhaps two million of the most respected inhabitants of our country. Today you have atoned for that persecution of the Quakers.

My address is to be on the subject of Quakers and peace.

In the last two or three weeks, I have been reading all I could about the views of Mr. Alfred Nobel on the subject of war and peace. His ideas were not completely consistent and unchanging. He seems to have had several views on this subject. Sometimes he thought that war would be stopped by the invention of more terrible weapons, though he did not dream of some of the weapons which are in existence today. Sometimes he thought it would be stopped by collective force, by arbitration, or by international law, and sometimes he mentioned international friendship. These divergent views of Nobel stress the fact that the struggle against war is a struggle which - if I may use a military metaphor - may be carried on on many fronts.

Under these circumstances, it is most appropriate that the successive recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize should explain what their particular approach is. So I speak to you today of the Quaker way and illustrate it not only from examples of the present time but from three centuries of Quaker history. Sometimes people say in America: You Quakers with your experience must know what all the answers are (that is an American phrase). No, we do not know all the answers, but at least we know what most of the questions are. We have pursued this aim long enough to know what some of the problems are in the search for peace.

As Miss Backhouse has said, our approach to this question is a religious approach. Perhaps, in early days, our pacifism was largely based upon texts of the New Testament, upon the words of Jesus, upon examples from the Bible. But as our religious perspective has changed, our views in this matter have still remained the same. As our religion has become more philosophical, or has grown with education and knowledge of sociology and history, we still with good conscience cling to our traditional renunciation of war. We are not impressed by the prestige of war as an ancient institution any more than we were impressed by the holding of slaves. Both these customs date back before the dawn of history, but within a few generations we found it possible to lead to complete success the struggle for the elimination of slavery in the lands where Friends lived.

So we believe that war is merely a convention of social habit and we believe that these conventions of social habit are subject to change, as much as we believe in the transformation of individuals. Christianity and experience teach us that men and customs can be transformed. We believe that war is a habit, a curious habit, a somewhat accidental habit that men have adopted, although in other areas they have found different means for pursuing similar ends. In your city you have order and custom and not anarchy, but between nations law does not exist, and war, so far from settling differences, is an extreme expression of anarchy.

That does not mean that wars are not waged for just ends. It means that we do not believe that it is the only way to achieve those just ends. We believe the means are not consistent with the ends, and the better the ends for which men fight, the less moral, the less effective is the method of war. In this particular area, mankind falls behind the standard we have accepted elsewhere. So on this point the Quaker is not an unrealistic perfectionist, but a practical moralist. He believes that this problem can be solved by other means. He believes this problem of war is a moral problem and that the force of religion is essential to its solution. The nature of religion on the one hand and the task of abolishing war on the other seem to us to fit perfectly with each other as task and tool should fit. Religion is concerned with the spiritual life of man. The elimination of war is a spiritual problem and so no wonder we cling in all stages of our religious development to this viewpoint.

It has come to us first as individuals - what shall I do, what is my duty? If an individual thinks that war is evil, we are so simpleminded, so naive, as to say: "If war is evil, then I do not take part in it", just as one might say, if drunkenness is evil, then I do not drink; if slaveholding is evil, then I do not hold slaves. I know that sounds too simple - almost foolish. I admit that that is our point of view, and this means, of course, that in every war some Friends have suffered not only fines, torture, punishment, or exile, but even the threat of death which, of course, is no more than the soldier faces, but in a different cause. William Penn2 has described the Quaker position in these few words: "Not fighting but suffering". Not all can follow this course, not all Quakers every time follow this course. We recognize that there are times when resistance appears at first to be a real virtue, and then only those most deeply rooted in religious pacifism can resist by other than physical means. We have learned that in the end only the spirit can conquer evil and we believe that in many recent situations those who have unwillingly employed force have learned this lesson at the last.

But in aiming to avoid any part in war, the Quaker meets an extremely difficult problem, especially with modern total war. Perhaps it will interest you to know what searchings of heart we Quakers have had, in order to discover what follows if one condemns war. Let me give a few illustrations.

In 1665 some English Quaker carpenters were building wooden ships on the Thames. They thought they were pacifists and had renounced war, and when there was danger of invasion by a Dutch fleet3, these carpenters were required to carry arms. Naturally, they refused to do so, but it never occurred to them that what they were building were warships. It comes slowly, this discovery. Before the First World War, military training was required of every young man in New Zealand. The young Quakers in New Zealand for the first time in their experience were faced with the problem of deciding whether, if war was wrong, training for war was equally wrong. A few years ago a promising young Quaker scientist was invited to take part in a government project, the purpose of which he knew very little. He suspected it was the creation of an atomic bomb and he refused, at sacrifice of great advancement in salary. A few years ago our Quaker boys had to choose whether they would engage in military service, whether, if they worked in the ambulance corps of the American Army, that was participation in war, or whether they would keep strictly out of uniform, serving as experiments for medical information or as nurses in insane hospitals, or foresters in remote camps.

My father was drafted for service in the American Civil War4. His choice was whether he would pay $350 to hire a substitute to fight for him or whether he would go to prison, and he had to decide whether paying for a substitute was much the same as taking part in war himself.

My great-grandfather, at the time of the Napoleonic Wars5, was a merchant. He had a share of ownership in a merchant ship. That ship turned privateer, without his knowledge, and captured a Dutch East Indiaman. His share of the prize was about £2,000. Now what would a Quaker do with £2,000 captured in war? He was a wise man, and the first thing he did was to insure his share of the ship with Lloyds of London. As a matter of fact, the ship was destroyed by a storm on its next trip - but he still had £2,000 that did not belong to him. Up to 1823 he and the Friends were still trying to find the owners of that Dutch ship because, as a Quaker, he could not keep those £2,000. In the end he found enough owners to pay them £3,345 principal and interest on that ship, and there were still over £2,000 that he could not dispose of. Although he advertised in the newspapers in Holland and tried to find the owners by the records and in every possible way, he was not able to do so. If you go to Amsterdam today, you will find a free school on Beerenstraat, with a picture on the top gable of the ship that was taken and my great-grandfather's initials on a stone over the door. As final payment to the unknown enemies in that city the English Quakers gave this school.

If you are not a pacifist, you do not have to face these problems of avoiding war and war implications as the Quakers do in all parts of the world when the whole civilian population is mobilized into war service.

Today there are millions of men in nearly every great nation who have taken part in war and they still believe that that war, or their part in it, was justified. As long as they hold that view they seem to me to be a risk against world peace. Those people who have once believed that war is justified can readily be persuaded that it will be justified again. While I am not mentioning the names of any nations, whether victor or vanquished, I believe it is true that this tendency to believe that war is justified creates in itself a danger to peace, and it is not lessened by what men have learned or experienced of the terrible damage that war can do materially, morally, or spiritually, or by what we know now that another war could do. I believe the greatest risk of war is in the minds of men who have an unrepentant and unchanging view of the justification of past wars. So perhaps in a world like this there is room for a few thousand persons like Quakers who take the opposite view, who begin with the assumption that war is not and has not been and will not be justified, on either practical or moral grounds. Such persons may have time, interest, and desire to put their minds on alternative ways.

Of course, Friends have found it necessary to think through their position on this as on many awkward questions. For example, they have had to think whether this view is disloyalty to the state, and they have had to learn to distinguish loyalty to the policy of a government in power from loyalty to the true interests of a nation. Social responsibility to the community is a very similar question.

They have been met with the argument that war is the lesser of two evils. I will not admit the validity of that argument. We have heard time and time again for over three hundred years that "this war is different", that this time it really is for a purpose which was not successful in the last war. In thinking this over, we have mostly learned that war could have been prevented. I feel it is true what a president of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt, expressed. In 1936 he said: "We can keep out of war, if those who watch and decide... make certain that the small decisions of each day do not lead toward war and if at the same time they possess the courage to say "no" to those who selfishly or unwisely would let us go to war6".

We have learned that few wars are justified by their results and that victory in war sometimes in itself makes difficult real peace.

We have learned that the line between aggression and defence is a very difficult division to draw. We are told by atomic scientists that defence will require aggression, that is, taking the first step, and we have also learned that even in defence the moral standards of the more virtuous nation tend to sink to those of the aggressor.

But I do not wish to give the impression that our Quaker pacifism is either passive or negative. It is part of a positive policy. The prevention of war is an essential part of that policy. It is our belief that we must work for the prevention of war by all means in our power, by influencing public opinion in peacetime, as we try to do, by interceding with governments, as we try to do, setting an example of a disarmed state as William Penn and the Quakers did in Pennsylvania, and by encouraging international organization, as again that great pioneer William Penn did in that most early statement of the principles of world government7, "An Essay Towards the Present and Future Peace of Europe".

Among those active and positive efforts must be included the international service of which Mr. Jahn and Miss Backhouse have spoken so extensively. This international service is not mere humanitarianism; it is not merely mopping up, cleaning up the world after war. It is aimed at creating peace by setting an example of a different way of international service. So our foreign relief is a means of rehabilitation and it is intended not merely to help the body but to help the spirit and to give men hope that there can be a peaceful world.

I do not know of any difficulty as great as trying to persuade governments to do what they do not intend to do. In the year 1941 in February, there were two American Quakers in the city of Oslo and two American Quakers in the city of London. What were they there for? To try to persuade both the British and the German governments to permit the sending of food and supplies to the children of the occupied countries. I myself was in London at that time, trying to get permission to go through the British blockade with food supplies for the children while my friends were here and in Berlin. We did not succeed. I sometimes think our purposes are best explained by our failures. But it is fun to try.

We are often baffled and frustrated. It took us eleven months to get into Hungary. But we got in and we have been working there for about a year now. A drunken soldier finally helped to get us in. And we are doing relief in Hungary today as we wish to do it. But we often have been baffled and frustrated. Sometimes we have been helped by people who did not intend to trust us. We have finally found governments helping us, imitating us, and extending our services. It always interests me to find a government taking over what we have done.

We cannot measure how far our service has affected the people involved. It is hard to judge how far-reaching the results of our efforts are. We do know, however, that there is in our country, in America, and also in England, a large store of goodwill for the people of Europe as well as most tangible expressions of that goodwill. In America there are people who are mindful of the suffering and needs of humanity. To elicit this from our fellow citizens has been for us Quakers a privilege, and so to give them a means of expressing ideals that they are half convinced are their own ideals too. We think that in doing so we may be rendering a greater service to America than to Europe and Asia.

But among those who need, we trust that our personal touch, the face to face contact of friendly American and British workers with those in need, is not only bringing food and clothing but bringing cheer and hope. It is very evident from the correspondence that we receive from Europe how much this means to many people. They say: It is not the food or the clothing that really affects us most. It is the confidence in man, the belief that somebody cares, that affects us most.

I may say that we find in governments too, that what cannot be done publicly can be done very intimately and privately with individuals, and that where you least expect it you will find help. We had some very extraordinary experiences with Nazi officials. When it comes to individuals, they usually understand what you are about. Perhaps some of those very officials had their lives saved in 1920-1924 by the same kind of efforts on our part. So it is our hope that our service will help to cool the passions of hate and fear and give faith in man and that the awards of the Nobel Committee to our Quaker service may enable us and our millions of friends throughout the world to persevere in meeting that deeper spiritual hunger and thus promote the cause of peace, as was the intention of the founder of the award.



Your Majesty, Your Royal Highness and friends.

On behalf of the American Friends Committee I accept our share of this award with humility and gratitude. We are humble because we recognise what we Quakers of today owe to the generations of Quakers who have for three centuries set the pattern of practical pacifism that we unfalteringly follow. We recognise also that the work of our Committee has been made possible through the cooperation of our fellow prize-winners, the Friends Service Council and by the support in funds, personel and in sympathetic understanding of thousands of Americans who are not members of our small Society of Friends.

We are grateful that in this award attention is again called to the need for the ideals that we profess - renunciation of all war - practical friendliness across frontiers, reconciliation with former enemies and former friends. Today in America, in Europe and in Asia men need almost as never before to bear an appeal to reason and to patience.

If any should question the appropriateness of bestowing the peace prize upon a group rather than upon an outstanding individual we may say this: The common people of all nations want peace. In the presence of great impersonal forces they feel individually helpless to promote it. You are saying to them here today that common folk, not statesmen, nor generals nor great men of affairs, but just simple plain men and women like the few thousand Quakers and their friends, if they devote themselves to resolute insistence on goodwill in place of force, even in the face of great disaster past or threatened, can do something to build a better, peaceful world. The future hope of peace lies with such personal sacrificial service. To this ideal humble persons everywhere may contribute.

It is not enough merely for us to do good - feeding and clothing the needy and to receive their heartfelt thanks. We must find ways in which even the needy can share in service. To this end our committee is trying to find means. May I suggest to you and the other countries of Europe a way that you can help us. You will need for this help neither money nor material gifts.

All Europe is rightly anxious about the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union. Here is a place where you can help. Norway, your well loved country, and the other nations of Europe must be the bridge of understanding. You must not take sides with either of us, you must help both of us cooperate. And I know from contacts I have made with persons from many countries of Europe that already they are anxious to do just this. You must have faith to do this - faith in all men, even in Americans and Russians. We earnestly invite you to share in this way our ministry of reconciliation.
