Disarmament, Technology and the Growth in Violence

Mr. Chairman, Honored guests:

In the first place it is my obvious and at the same time most pleasant duty to express my gratitude for the honor that has been accorded me by the award of the 1982 Nobel Peace Prize.

May I then mention that I shall deal not only with the general subject of disarmament, but I shall also direct the attention to the connection between armament problems and the headlong on-rush of technology and the growth in violence. We must never forget the trampling down of human dignity and rights, the increase in acts of violence and the use of torture. All of this testifies to an incredible persistence in contempt for the suffering of individual men and women.

But I would also like to express my very special thanks to the Nobel Committee for hitting on the idea of dividing the prize between Dr. García Robles and myself. This indicates that we have not received the prize only as personal tributes to ourselves, but that the entire movement which aims at promoting peace and reducing the use of violence has been given a great encouragement. This was emphasized, too, by the chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, Egil Aarvik. The whole popular movement of protest, which at present is and has to be directed mainly against the use of the extreme weapon of terror, the atom bomb, has acquired a recognized legitimacy. This is bound to influence the attitudes and decisions not least of leading politicians and military chiefs in the superpowers.

I am intentionally not using the phrase "striving for peace" too frequently. The longing for peace is rooted in the hearts of all men. But the striving, which at present has become so insistent, cannot lay claim to such an ambition as leading the way to eternal peace, or solving all disputes among nations. The economic and political roots of the conflicts are too strong. Nor can it pretend to create a lasting state of harmonious understanding between men. Our immediate goal must be more modest: aimed at preventing what, in the present situation, is the greatest threat to the very survival of mankind, the threat of nuclear weapons.

I should in the beginning like to emphasize also that I am particularly gratified that on this occasion the award goes to two citizens of nations which are both denuclearised and non-allied. The mass media calls attention to this fact all too seldom, as they are so one-sidedly concerned with the rivalry between the two superpower blocs. There are, after all, so many other countries in the world, and most have refused to serve as hostages to the superpowers.

Maybe I should add - and I hope this does not sound boastful - that we are two delegates who have shown at the disarmament negotiations and in the United Nations that rhetoric is by no means enough. We have tried to speak for greater emphasis on analysis, and constructivity.

More must be done in concrete terms in order to promote the cause of disarmament. García Robles has ingeniously constructed and tenaciously sought to follow up the Tlatelolco agreement, with a view to making the whole of Latin America a denuclearized zone. He has actually succeeded so far as to get the nuclear weapon powers to enter into binding agreements to refrain from attacking with nuclear arms nations that have joined a zone free from nuclear weapons.

I for my part, with some colleagues of mine, have presented many concrete and elaborated proposals. Sometimes we have had some success, though more rarely on major questions. But I have, for example, managed to get the Swedish government budget to pay the costs of SIPRI (Swedish International Peace Research Institute) as well as the less known seismological Hagfors station. That enables us to monitor independently, and systematically even the smallest subterranean nuclear tests, using the most modern equipment, and to publish the results internationally, unhampered by any political considerations. This work has more recently been followed by efforts to build up an international network for open verification of nuclear test explosions.

These efforts of our two countries are mentioned as examples of the opportunities that exist for objectively refuting so many of the attempts by the nuclear weapon powers to conceal or give false explanations of actual facts. Or at least their attempts to delay the truth breaking through. The smaller nations can in fact exercise greater influence on disarmament negotiations than they have hitherto done. But then we must exert ourselves to break through the wall of silence which, unfortunately, the great powers have erected to ward off the small powers' influence in the international debate.

It is of the greatest importance that people and governments in many more countries than ours should realize that it is more dangerous to have access to nuclear arms than not to possess them. Without nuclear arms we run less risk of being drawn into the orbit of the great powers, with their hyper-dangerous weapons. And after all, there is no defense against them.

The world generally speaking is now drifting on a more and more devastating course towards the absurd target of extermination - or rather, to be more exact - of the northern hemisphere's towns, fields, and the people who have developed our civilization.

The distressing situation of our era, which recalls the fate that overtook Rome, is rising from a clearly irredeemable misconception, viz. that the use of weapons, violence, can lead to victory.

How would it be possible, even at immense expense, to inaugurate a new and happy existence for the world on the ruins of one that would be at least half-destroyed? The misconception that a victory can be worth its price, has in the nuclear age become a total illusion.

There is no doubt that what the superpowers are now planning, and in which they are investing billions, is precisely the preparation for waging war. New super-technological weapons systems committed to the service of new strategies are now quite openly aimed at the waging of war, and at an imagined "victory".

The new generations of intercontinental missiles do not change the basis for, but just continue the same old strategy, for example the United States MX (which will not be ready for deployment before 1986, if ever) or its counterparts, the SS-17, SS-18 and SS-19, which are already in place. They do not alter the fact that both superpowers have possessed a decisive basic capacity since about 1960, viz. to deal a decisive blow at one another's mainlands. At that time, a so-called "balance of terror" may be said to have existed. As I and so many others have pointed out, the two great powers already at that time had "sufficient" capacity to deter one another from launching a nuclear strike.

Soon after Kennedy had been elected President, General Taylor in 1960 advised him that between 100 and 200 long-range missiles would be sufficient; and various experts ever since have made similar assessments. One or two scientific writers have even gone so far as to say that one missile on each side would be enough (e.g. McGeorge Bundy and Herbert York).1 As the arms race proceeded, however, the experts have as a rule stayed at the conclusion that the target for a sufficient deterrent would involve something like 400 missiles, capable of reaching from one continent to the other. All developments over and above this have simply meant one more step in the direction of increased instability. They have been unnecessary, and at what a cost!

A great amount has been talked and written about what constitutes a sufficient balance and what really is meant by the concepts of "balance" and "deterrence". And despite the fact that the experts have disclosed what is the simple truth, misconceptions arise and are proliferated: the idea that more is needed when one already has more than sufficient.

After having read reams and personally written so much on this subject on numerous occasions, without obtaining a hearing, I am actually starting to find it a trifle wearying. But the truth must be brought home and emphasized again and again. This I have done most recently in the revised preface to the third edition of my book The Game of Disarmament which had so far only been available in English. Today, of all days, it is appearing in a Swedish translation, in an issue of the periodical Tiden.

That the argument is mainly carried out with the long-range intercontinental missiles in view, does not mean that other nuclear arms are not subject to the same reasoning. I shall go on repeating the truth until the politicians get it into their heads, that when one has sufficient, one does not need more.

The conclusion of where the rivalry of the two superpowers is leading us is terrifyingly realistic. Just now the ongoing process is moving from deterrence to the capacity for waging actual war. This has been described in a flood of new books, particularly in America. Here I would like to give just one quotation; it is from the highly respected, and by no means dangerously radical, daily paper The Washington Post of April 13, 1982:

    "A point was reached long ago at which both the United States and the Soviet Union had such monstrous arsenals that further accretions became senseless. These have been 37 years of lunacy, of idiots racing against imbeciles, of civilized nations staggering blindly toward a finishing line of unspeakable peril.

    The immediate necessity is to call a truce, to stop the further buildup of nuclear weapons by either side".

I agree with the many who consider freezing all sorts of weapons systems a first step in a realistic disarmament policy. If only the authorities could be made to realize that the forces leading them on in the armament race are just insane. I have lately come to understand this all the more clearly since being in contact with the international campaign among medical doctors against nuclear arms, both in Boston and Stockholm. They now encompass a membership of 38.000, being specialists from both East and West. At the present moment they are, in fact, holding a meeting in Stockholm.2

Physicians have now clearly explained how human beings react to the threat of nuclear weapons. On the one hand by just closing their eyes, and this, in fact, has long been the reaction of the "ordinary man". Or, on the other hand, by a kind of nationalistic paranoia. As the experts so bluntly put it: persecution mania. There is a constant magnifying of the enemy, exaggerating the threat he poses, persuading people that he is "the absolute enemy", ready to gobble them up. And so the reasoning goes, more armaments are required. But this is insane when we know that both superpowers already have so much more than "enough".

The medical specialists have also clearly demonstrated how completely insufficient our resources are for giving medical care to the wounded, even in highly developed countries, in the event of a strike with nuclear weapons.

The persecution mania supported by what already Eisenhower called the military-industrial complex is what now motivates leading politicians to indulge in an unlimited arms race. It is brought forth from the nationalism that flares up during any conflict of interests between states. But it goes far beyond the boundaries of any natural patriotism, which is based on love of one's own country and its cultural traditions. We have recently seen examples of that kind of distorted nationalism in the conflict between Great Britain and Argentina.

A mighty protest movement, speaking the language of common sense in more and more countries, has now arisen to confront all these forces that are engaged in the armament race and the militarization of the world. For the moment this movement has won most remarkable strength in countries like the Netherlands and Norway, but more recently in West Germany and the United States as well. It also lives in the hearts of the people in the East, although there it has so much greater difficulty in making itself heard.

In this new popular movement of protest against nuclear weapons women and, more and more churches and professional organizations are playing a leading role. I have unfortunately not the time to describe at greater length this flood of mighty protests against the acceptance of nuclear weapons. But in all sincerity, I personally believe that those who are leaders with political power over the world will be forced some day, sooner or later, to give way to common sense and the will of the people.

Violence and technology

War is murder. And the military preparations now being made for a potential major confrontation are aimed at collective murder. In a nuclear age the victims would be numbered by the millions.

This naked truth must be faced.

The age in which we live can only be characterized as one of barbarism. Our civilization is in the process not only of being militarized, but also being brutalized.

There are two main features which mark this senseless trend. Let me briefly - just as everything in my lecture must necessarily be abbreviated and simplified - refer to them as rivalry and violence. Rivalry for the power to exploit the headlong on-rush of technology militates against cooperation. The result is increased violence, with more and more sophisticated weapons being used. This is precisely what sets out our age as one of barbarism and brutalization. But the moment of truth should now have arrived.

I know that these are strong words. I know, too, that there are good forces at work, trying to check this ill-starred development.

May I at this juncture make a personal confession? I have always regarded global development as a struggle between the forces of good and evil. Not to be simplified as a struggle between Jesus and Satan, since I do not consider that the process is restricted to our own sphere of culture. Rather perhaps to be symbolized in the most general terms as a struggle between Ormuzd, the good, and Ahriman, the evil. My personal philosophy of life is one of ethics.

It seems to me as if the evil forces have now concentrated more and more power in their hands, Dare we believe that the leaders of the world's great nations will wake up, will see the precipice towards which they are heading and change direction?

The driving force in the development of our civilization, at least since the Renaissance, has evidently been the progress of technology. But technology is two-edged. It can always be exploited either by good forces or by evil forces. And we human beings do not seem to have succeeded to make a choice quite consciously, nor how to steer the considerable consequences.

The credit side of this necessarily double-entry form of bookkeeping has naturally to record the tremendous progress that has helped to overcome so much misery and raise millions of people to a comfortable living standard. The inventions and the great discoveries have opened up whole continents to reciprocal communication and interchange, provided we are willing. The scientific innovations, not least in the field of medicine, and a great deal more must, of course, be placed to the credit of technology.

But on the other hand, the triumphs of the evil forces are visible in numerous areas. I shall confine myself here to what I really know something about, and which is also the most ominous development: the growing role played by armaments. First and foremost arms are tools in the service of rival nations, pointing at the possibility of a future war. War and preparations for war have acquired a kind of legitimacy. The tremendous proliferation of arms, through their production and export, have now made them available more or less to all and sundry, right down to handguns and stilettoes. The cult of violence has by now so permeated the relations between human individuals that we are compelled to witness an increase in everyday violence, violence in the streets and in the homes. These are the models we set for our young people. It does not just happen. It is disclosed by science that practically one-half of trained intellectual resources are being mobilized for murderous purposes. During the post-war years we have been in a position to observe a development ranging from the simple Hiroshima bomb to all sorts of advanced technological devices. As an example I could select the invisible STEALTH aircraft, or the increasingly razor-sharp competition being played out in the oceans of the world, ASW (Anti-Submarine Warfare).

I have indicated how armaments promote - though admittedly not cause - collective military violence. But we should never forget the interconnections with the fact that the aforementioned personal violence, the crimes of violence committed in our cities, are to a large extent a result of the spread of arms.

How great is not the importance of weapons being so easily available?

This should be studied. How often and with what weapons are killing and murder committed, in society and within families, which actually appears to be the commonest scene of violent crime? Where do these arms come from, these Saturday night specials that constitute the instrument of threats in bank robberies, or the hand grenades used by terrorists? How can their sales and their import be permitted?

The very fact that war, despite the ordinances issued by the United Nations, should receive more and more of a kind of "sanction" as a natural exercise of force by various nations, in my opinion plays a more ominous role in maintaining what I have called the weaponry and violence cult of our age.

Militarization proceeds not only through acts of war and the purchase of arms. It is also promoted - primarily, of course, where young men are concerned - by military training, defense manuals etc. Exercises and war games erode the basic ethical values contained in the command "thou shalt not kill". We tolerate, in fact, more and more the exact opposite of what both religious creeds and the international law on more humane warfare are endeavoring to instil in us.

It is frightening that in recent years such an increase has occurred in acts of terrorism, which have even reached peaceful countries such as ours. And as a "remedy", more and more security forces are established to protect the lives of individual men and women. The life of a politician is becoming increasingly hazardous. Where is the end of this spiral of force and counter-force?

Many countries persecute their own citizens and intern them in prisons or concentration camps. Oppression is becoming more and more a part of the systems. Lech Walesa's sufferings may stand as a symbol for the way in which human rights are being trampled down, in one country after another.3

A cultural factor promoting violence which nowadays undoubtedly is highly effective is the mass media. And particularly everything that enters our minds through pictorial media. A wide range of investigations on this subject have been made and published in many countries. Some programs tend to have a more momentary effect, while others confirm more permanent effects of indoctrination.

The violence shown in the mass media also has a differentiated effect, since violence committed by the "good guys" is imprinted more deeply in our apperceptions than violence committed by the "bad guys".

We also know that children and young people are more liable to accept a brutal pattern of action. This inability to filter or select the impressions that make their mark on us also has consequences in an international context: the morals and customs of the Western world are taught to the Third World through the medium of film and news exports, which are paralleled by the export of arms, and which at any rate hardly work in the opposite direction.

These are signs that there is something very sick in our society.

Finally, I should like briefly to return for a moment to the subject of technology and peace. I do this mainly in order to submit a practical proposal. And in this connection I should like to mention Nobel, a man who maybe better than anyone symbolizes the two-edged nature of technology.

Nobel was a genuine friend of peace. He even went so far as to believe that he had invented a tool of destruction, dynamite, which would make war so senseless that it would become impossible. He was wrong.

But, in common with the forces of technology generally, his and other people's inventions can be used in the service of both good and evil. Nitroglycerine is a good example, which he himself cited. It is capable of soothing the pains of cardiac cramp, as he experienced, in common with myself. It can be used to blow up harbors as well as human beings. Nobel himself built up a great war industry.

In that man's breast, as is so often the case with human beings, dwelt two souls. Psychology is beginning, however, to draw aside the veil and reveal the labyrinths which are part of our personalities.

I should like to quote a passage from Nobel's will and testament, which I believe has gone unobserved and which is of direct practical value. Nobel states, inter alia, that the purpose of the fund is to support "the holding and promotion of peace congresses".

As far as I know, no peace congresses have been held in the nearly 100 years of the will's existence. I should like to suggest a change of policy for coming years, welcoming organizers of "peace congresses" as Nobel Prize candidates. Such conferences might provide excellent occasions for submitting important questions to a dynamic, intellectually factual analysis and debate. The mighty popular movement against the arms race which is now gaining strength, will facilitate and at the same time require a stimulus of this kind - to serve the building of our future.


Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Mr. Chairman,

I wish to assure you that the brevity of my speech is in no way a measure of the depth of my gratitude.

I would like to express special thanks to the Chairman of the Nobel Committee for a bold acknowledgement of the principles which must support all efforts to attain peace and disarmament.

My main purpose today is to express my warmly felt thanks to the Norwegian Nobel Committee for granting me this year's Nobel Prize for the cause of peace.

I also extend my thanks to the large groups of people who have, due to a new awareness, brought forth a strong popular movement for peace. Now sounds the cry "Down with nuclear weapons!"

My gratitude also goes to those great numbers of experts and authors in many countries who have destroyed false misconceptions and provided us with powerful arguments for a cessation of this competition in overarmament.

All mankind is now learning that these nuclear weapons can only serve to destroy, never become beneficial.

And thus we can hope that men will understand that the interest of all are the same, that hope lies in cooperation. We can then perhaps keep PEACE.



The Latin American Nuclear-Weapon Free Zone

In seems advisable to point out from the outset that the Latin American nuclear-weapon-free zone has the privilege of being the only one in existence which covers densely inhabited territories. Outside it only in Antarctica, the Outer Space and the sea bed are similar prohibitions in force, based on treaties concluded in 1959, 1967 and 1971, respectively.

The official title of the treaty which established the Latin American zone and defined its statute is the "Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America", but it is usually referred to as the "Treaty of Tlatelolco", employing the Aztec name for the district of the Mexican capital where the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Mexico is located and where the treaty itself was opened to signature almost sixteen years ago, on February 14, 1967.

The modest purpose of this lecture is to provide a synoptic view both of the genesis and the provisions of the treaty.

 

I. Genesis of the Treaty of Tlatelolco

The first international document in the history of the events directly related to the genesis of the Treaty of Tlatelolco was the Joint Declaration of 29 April 1963. In this declaration the Presidents of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador and Mexico announced that their governments were willing to sign a Latin American multilateral agreement by which they would undertake not "to manufacture, store, or test nuclear weapons or devices for launching nuclear weapons".

Seven months later, the United Nations General Assembly, taking as a basis a draft resolution submitted by eleven Latin American countries (the five previously mentioned, plus Costa Rica, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Panama and Uruguay), approved on 27 November 1963 resolution 1911 (XVIII). In this resolution inter alia the General Assembly welcomed the initiative of the five Presidents for the military denuclearization of Latin America; expressed the hope that the States of the region would initiate studies "concerning the measures that should be agreed upon with a view to achieving the aims" of the Joint Declaration, and requested the Secretary-General of the United Nations to extend to the States of Latin America, at their request, "such technical facilities as they may require in order to achieve the aims set forth in the present resolution".

Almost one year elapsed between the adoption of this General Assembly resolution and the next step worth mentioning in a review of the antecedents of the treaty. This interval was not wasted, however. The Mexican Government put it to good use with active diplomatic consultations which resulted in the convening of a Latin American conference known as the "Preliminary Session on the Denuclearization of Latin America" (or REUPRAL, its Spanish acronym). Meeting in Mexico City from 23 to 27 November 1964, REUPRAL adopted a measure which was later to prove decisive for the success of the Latin American enterprise - the creation of an ad hoc organ, the "Preparatory Commission for the Denuclearization of Latin America" (known also by its Spanish acronym, COPREDAL). The Preparatory Commission was specifically instructed (in the same resolution whereby it was established) "to prepare a preliminary draft of a multilateral treaty for the denuclearization of Latin America, and to this end, to conduct any prior studies and take any prior steps that it deems necessary".*

COPREDAL had its first session in Mexico City from 15 to 22 March 1965. In this session, the Commission adopted its rules of procedure and set up four subsidiary organs: a Coordination Committee and three working groups. Subsequently the Commission would create another subsidiary organ - the "Negotiating Committee".

The Preparatory Commission held a total of four sessions, the last of which took place just under two years after its creation, from 31 January to 14 February 1967. Contrary to what has generally happened with other disarmament treaties and conventions, the draft articles for the future treaty dealing with verification, inspection, and control were the first to be completed at the second session of the Commission (23 August-2 September 1965). At that time a full declaration of principles was also drafted to serve as a basis for the Preamble of the draft treaty.

During its third session, COPREDAL received from its Coordinating Committee a working paper which contained the complete text of a preliminary draft for the treaty that the Commission had received the mandate to prepare. This draft, together with other proposals submitted by member states, provided the basis for the deliberations of the session. Their result was the unanimous approval of a document entitled "Proposals for the Preparation of the Treaty for the Denuclearization of Latin America" which played as prominent a role in the history of the treaty as that of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals in the history of the United Nations1 These "Proposals" included all provisions which might prove necessary for the treaty as a whole, although in some cases COPREDAL, not having been able to find solutions satisfactory to all, had been obliged to present to the Governments two parallel alternatives.

From those few pending questions which the Commission would be called upon to solve at its fourth session, the most important one was the entry into force of the treaty. This issue provoked what was probably the greatest discussion in COPREDAL's proceedings. Because of this problem and due to the positive precedent established by COPREDAL's solution to the problem, it is worth examining the proceedings in somewhat greater detail.

When the Preparatory Commission considered this subject in April 1966, two distinct views became apparent. According to the first view, the treaty should come into force, between states which would ratify it, on the date of deposit of their respective instruments of ratification, in keeping with standard practice. The representative Latin American body to be established by the treaty should begin to function as soon as eleven instruments of ratification were deposited, as this number constituted a majority of the twenty-one members of the Preparatory Commission. Those states supporting the alternative view argued that the treaty, although signed and ratified by all member states of the Preparatory Commission, should enter into force only upon completion of four requirements, essentially those defined in Article 28 of the treaty. These four requirements may be summarized as follows: the signature and ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and its Additional Protocols I and II by all states to which they were opened, and the conclusion of bilateral or multilateral agreements concerning the application of the Safeguards System of the International Atomic Energy Agency by each party to the treaty.

As a result of these differing views COPREDAL was obliged to present, in its proposals, two parallel texts. These texts stated respectively the provisions that the treaty would contain, according to whether one accepted the first or the second thesis. To solve the problem, the Coordinating Committee, in its report of 28 December 1966, suggested the adoption of a conciliatory formula, which could receive the approval of all member states of the Commission without detriment to their respective positions on the alternative texts. It was this formula, with some modifications, which was finally adopted and incorporated into Article 28 of the treaty. In keeping with it, the treaty would go into effect for all states that had ratified it upon completion of the four requirements specified in paragraph 1 of Article 28. That notwithstanding, the second paragraph of the Article states:

    "All signatory states shall have the imprescriptible right to waive, wholly or in part, the requirements laid down in the preceding paragraph. They may do so by means of a declaration which shall be annexed to their respective instrument of ratification and which may be formulated at the time of deposit of the instrument or subsequently. For those states which exercise this right, this Treaty shall enter into force upon deposit of the declaration, or as soon as those requirements have been met which have not been expressly waived".

Moreover, the third paragraph of the same Article stipulates:

    "As soon as this Treaty has entered into force in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 for eleven states, the Depositary Government shall convene a preliminary meeting of those states in order that the Agency may be set up and commence its work".

As one can see, an eclectic system was adopted, which, while respecting the viewpoints of all signatory states, prevented nonetheless any particular state from precluding the enactment of the treaty for those which would voluntarily wish to accept the statute of military denuclearization defined therein.

The Treaty of Tlatelolco has thus contributed effectively to dispel the myth that for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone it would be an essential requirement that all states of the region concerned should become, from the very outset, parties to the treaty establishing the zone. The system adopted in the Latin American instrument proves that, although no state can obligate another to join such a zone, neither can one prevent others wishing to do so from adhering to a regime of total absence of nuclear weapons within their own territories.

Once the question of the entry into force of the treaty had been settled, at the fourth session of COPREDAL, the Preparatory Commission proceeded to settle, without major difficulties, the few other pending problems. On 12 February 1967, the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America was unanimously approved and two days later, at the solemn closing ceremony of the Commission's proceedings, it was opened to signature and subscribed to by the representatives of fourteen of its twenty-one members. As of August 1982, fifteen years later, the number of signatory states stands at twenty-five, of which twenty-two are already parties to the treaty.

Additional Protocol I which is open to the four States - United Kingdom, Netherlands, United States, and France - which are internationally responsible for territories lying within the limits of the geographical zone established in the treaty, has been signed by all those states and ratified by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and the United States. With regard to France it seems that the ratification process is at present well advanced. The five nuclear weapon states - the United Kingdom, the United States, France, China and the Soviet Union - are already parties to Additional Protocol II which is destined for them.

As provided for in paragraph 3 of Article 28 previously quoted, as soon as the treaty entered into force for eleven states, the Depositary Government convened a "preliminary meeting" of those states in order to set up the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America known by its Spanish acronym OPANAL. This preliminary meeting (REOPANAL) took place in late June 1969 and carried out successfully all the preparatory work necessary for the first session of the General Conference of OPANAL. The latter was inaugurated on 2 September 1969 in the presence of U Thant, the then Secretary-General of the United Nations, and Sigvard Eklund, the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). After seven working days the General Conference gave its approval to a series of basic juridical and administrative documents which provided the foundations for the Latin American Agency created by the treaty. To date the General Conference has held seven regular sessions and two special sessions in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.

 

II. Analytical Summary of the Treaty of Tlatelolco

As a complement to the above brief survey of the preparatory work leading to the conclusion of the Tlatelolco Treaty, the following paragraphs are intended to give a general idea of its contents and to carry out a brief analytical summary of some of its main provisions.

The treaty comprises a preamble, thirty-one articles, one transitional article and two additional protocols.

The preamble defines the fundamental aims pursued by the states which drafted the treaty by stating their conviction that:

    "The military denuclearization of Latin America - being understood to mean the undertaking entered into internationally in this Treaty to keep their territories forever free from nuclear weapons - will constitute a measure which will spare their peoples from the squandering of their limited resources on nuclear armaments and will protect them against possible nuclear attacks on their territories, and will also constitute a significant contribution towards preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and a powerful factor for general and complete disarmament".

It is also worth noting that the Final Document approved by the first special session of the UN General Assembly devoted to disarmament, which met May-June 1978, contains several declaratory statements of a striking similarity to those included in the sixteen-year-old preamble of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The Latin American states, for instance, declared themselves convinced:

    "That the incalculable destructive power of nuclear weapons has made it imperative that the legal prohibition of war should be strictly observed in practice if the survival of civilization and of mankind itself is to be assured,

    That nuclear weapons, whose terrible effects are suffered, indiscriminately and inexorably, by military forces and civilian population alike, constitute, through the persistence of the radioactivity they release, an attack on the integrity of the human species and ultimately may even render the whole earth uninhabitable".

The United Nations, for its part, has proclaimed:

    "Mankind today is confronted with an unprecedented threat of self-extinction arising from the massive and competitive accumulation of the most destructive weapons ever produced. Existing arsenals of nuclear weapons alone are more than sufficient to destroy all life on earth ...

    Unless its avenues are closed, the continued arms race means a growing threat to international peace and security and even to the very survival of mankind ...

    Removing the threat of a world war - a nuclear war - is the most acute and urgent task of the present day. Mankind is confronted with a choice: we must halt the arms race and proceed to disarmament or face annihilation".

As to the articles of the treaty, their contents may be described briefly as follows:

Article 1 defines the obligations of the parties. The following four articles (2-5) provide definitions of some terms employed in the treaty: contracting parties, territory, zone of application and nuclear weapons. Article 6 deals with the "meeting of signatories", while Articles 7-11 establish the structure and procedures of the "Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America" (OPANAL) created by the treaty, and state the functions and powers of its principal organs: the General Conference, the Council and the Secretariat. The five succeeding articles (12-16) and paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 18 describe the functioning of the "control system", also established by the treaty. Article 17 contains general provisions on the peaceful use of nuclear energy and Article 18 deals with peaceful nuclear explosions.

Article 19 examines the relations of OPANAL with other international organizations, whereas Article 20 outlines the measures that the General Conference shall take in cases of serious violations of the treaty, such measures mainly involving simultaneous transmission of reports to the Security Council and the General Assembly of the United Nations. Article 21 safeguards the rights and obligations of the parties under the Charter of the United Nations and, in the case of states members of the Organization of American States, under existing regional treaties. Article 23 makes it binding for the contracting parties to notify the Secretariat of OPANAL of any international agreement concluded by any of them on matters with which the treaty is concerned.

The settlement of controversies concerning the interpretation or application of the treaty is covered by Article 24. Articles 22, 25-27 and 29-31 contain what is generally known as "final clauses" dealing with questions such as privileges and immunities, signature, ratification and deposit, reservations (which the treaty does not admit), amendments, duration and denunciation, and authentic texts and registration. The transitional article specifies that "denunciation of the declaration referred to in Article 28, paragraph 2, shall be subject to the same procedures as the denunciation" of the treaty, except that it will take effect on the date of delivery of the respective notification and not three months later as provided in Article 30, paragraph 2, for denunciation of the treaty. In paragraph 2 of Article 26, the Government of Mexico is designated the "Depositary Government" of the treaty whereas Article 7, paragraph 4, stipulates that the headquarters of OPANAL "shall be in Mexico City". Finally, Article 28 reflects in its text the compromise formula which, as already explained, overcame the most serious obstacle which confronted COPREDAL: the entry into force of the treaty.

The two Additional Protocols to the treaty have identical preambles. Their texts recall UN Resolution 1911 (XVIII) and state the conviction that the treaty "represents an important step towards ensuring the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons". The texts also point out that the treaty "is not an end in itself but, rather, a means of achieving general and complete disarmament at a later stage", and finally express the desire to contribute "towards ending the armaments race". The operative parts of the protocols are naturally different from one another, although they have identical duration (the same as that of the treaty) and entry into force for the states which ratify each Protocol (the date of the deposit of the respective instruments of ratification).

Under Article 1 of Additional Protocol I, those extra-continental states which, de jure or defacto, are internationally responsible for territories lying within the limits of the geographical zone established by the treaty would, upon becoming parties to the protocol, agree "to undertake to apply the statute of denuclearization in respect to warlike purposes as defined in Articles 1, 3, 5 and 13 of the Treaty" to such territories.

One aspect which should be borne in mind is that this protocol does not give those states the right to participate in the General Conference or in the Council of the Latin American Agency. But neither does it impose on those states any of the obligations relating to the system of control established in Article 14 (providing for semi-annual reports), in Article 15 (providing for special reports), and in Article 16 (providing for special inspections). In addition, the prohibition of reservations included in the treaty's Article 27 is not applicable to the protocol. Thus, in the protocol the necessary balance has been preserved between rights and obligations: although the rights are less extensive, the obligations are also fewer.

With regard to Additional Protocol II, the obligations assumed by the nuclear powers parties to the protocol are stated in its Articles 1 through 3 in the following terms:

    Respecting "in all its express aims and provisions" the "statute of denuclearization of Latin America in respect of warlike purposes, as defined, delimited and set forth" in the Treaty of Tlatelolco.

    Not contributing "in anyway to the performance of acts involving a violation of the obligations of Article 1 of the Treaty in the territories to which the Treaty applies".

    Not using or threatening to use "nuclear weapons against the contracting parties of the Treaty".

III. Conclusions

The importance of nuclear-weapon-free zones has been emphasized several times by the United Nations. The General Assembly in its Resolution 3472 B (XXX) of 11 December 1975 stated that "nuclear-weapon-free zones constitute one of the most effective means for preventing the proliferation, both horizontal and vertical, of nuclear weapons and for contributing to the elimination of the danger of a nuclear holocaust".

Subsequently, on 30 June 1978 the General Assembly, in the Program of Action adopted by consensus as its first special session devoted to disarmament, stressed the significance of the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones as a disarmament measure.

The weight which the international community attaches to the Latin American nuclear-weapon-free zone was manifest from the very moment the Treaty of Tlatelolco was presented to the General Assembly. In its Resolution 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, the General Assembly welcomed it "with particular satisfaction" and declared that it "constitutes an event of historic significance in the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promote international peace and security". Such weight has been once again evidenced when, in the general debate of the first special disarmament Assembly, no less than forty-five States had supportive comments for the treaty.

The Treaty of Tlatelolco has shown the crucial importance of ad hoc preparatory efforts, such as those carried out for two years by COPREDAL, in attaining the desired goal. Furthermore, the Latin American nuclear-weapon free zone which is now nearing completion has become in several respects an example which, notwithstanding the different characteristics of each region, is rich in inspiration. It provides profitable lessons for all states wishing to contribute to the broadening of the areas of the world from which those terrible instruments of mass destruction that are the nuclear weapons would be forever proscribed, process which, as unanimously declared by the General Assembly in 1978, "should be encouraged with the ultimate objective of achieving a world entirely free of nuclear weapons".


Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is indeed a special privilege to have been distinguished with the Nobel Peace Prize for 1982.

Such a high honor carries for me on this occasion particular significance both for the exceptional qualities of the person with whom I share the prize - Alva Myrdal, my old friend and partner of so many battles fought in the forums of multilateral diplomacy, which have emphasised once again the identity of purpose of Mexico and Sweden in the fields of peace and of disarmament - and for the reasons specifically mentioned by the members of the Nobel Committee in their explanatory statement to the effect that they have decided to award the Peace Prize for 1982 "to two persons who for many years have played a central role in the United Nations' disarmament negotiations" and who have helped "to open the eyes of the world to the threat mankind faces in continued nuclear armament".

To correctly appraise that threat it will suffice to recall that the United Nations General Assembly unanimously declared in 1978, at its first special session devoted to disarmament, that it is "the very survival of mankind" which finds itself threatened by "the existence of nuclear weapons and the continuing arms race".

Similar reasons, no doubt, moved Albert Einstein and Bertrand Russell to state in their historic Manifesto of 1955, speaking "not as members of this or that nation, continent, or creed, but as human beings, members of the species Man, whose continued existence is in doubt", that we have "to learn to think in a new way".

In fact, every time that in the past a new weapon was invented, people would say - and, as is well known, Nobel himself originally shared this belief - that it was so terrible that it would never be used. Nevertheless it was, and even though it was terrible, it did not make the human race disappear. But, as so rightly stated by that eminent philosopher of history who was Arnold Toynbee "now we have something that could really extinguish life on our planet. Mankind has not found itself in a similar situation since the end of the palaeolithic age…. In fact, the threat to mankind's survival has been much greater since 1945 than it was during the first million years of history". There is no doubt that - and I again use here the authoritative concepts of Einstein and Russell expressed almost thirty years ago and which obviously are even more valid today - "it is feared that if many H-bombs are used there will be universal death - sudden only for a minority, but for the majority a slow torture of disease and disintegration".

The foregoing considerations, of unimpeachable authority, have led me to think something which I would not dare mention had I not already received the Nobel Peace Prize, inasmuch as otherwise I would risk being accused of acting pro domo or, in other words, for personal reasons: the advisability that when awarding the prize in the future, the highest priority be given to the contribution which the candidates, be they individuals or non-governmental organisations, have made to disarmament.

To justify this suggestion it would be enough to bear in mind that, as the General Assembly of the United Nations rightfully proclaimed - and it did so by consensus - if it continues to be true that security is "an inseparable element of peace", at present "the increase in weapons, especially nuclear weapons, far from helping to strengthen international security, on the contrary weakens it", inasmuch as "the accumulation of weapons, particularly nuclear weapons, today constitutes much more a threat than a protection for the future of mankind". Thus, it is evident that the time has come "to seek security in disarmament".

I am convinced that a man with the foresight of Alfred Nobel would have so provided if he were to draw up his will in our days, when it can rightly be said that there is an organic relation between peace and disarmament. Naturally, that should not mean disregard to the numerous contributions which can be made indirectly to peace in the broad field of human rights, beginning with the right of self-determination of peoples whose observance requires also respect for the basic principle of non-intervention. A practical solution could perhaps be one involving a procedure similar to that which resulted in the creation of the prize of economics in 1968 thanks to a donation from the Bank of Sweden and which is awarded by the Royal Academy of Sciences of Sweden, which awards the prizes of physics and chemistry. If another Maecenas were now to be found who might provide the necessary funds, a new prize devoted to human rights could be established and awarded annually by the same Nobel Committee of Norway which awards the Nobel Peace Prize.

I trust that this suggestion, which I deem constructive, be interpreted as it is meant: a modest contribution to show my sincere appreciation for the honor which has been conferred on me by the Nobel Committee. Were it to become a reality, the intervals between the Nobel Peace Prizes awarded for achievements in the fields of disarmament would never again be as extended as has unfortunately been the case during the second half of the current century.

The fact that lately some circles, not less powerful by their small size, have been actively promoting certain theories, as dangerous as they are illusory, of a "limited", "winnable" or "protracted" nuclear war, as well as their obsession of "nuclear superiority", make it advisable to bear always in mind that the immediate goal of all States, as was expressly declared in the Final Document of the Special Assembly of 1978, "is that of the elimination of the danger of a nuclear war".

In order to contribute to the achievement of this pressing objective, the United Nations has just launched last June, during the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, a "World Disarmament Campaign", which, under the auspices of the Organisation and coordinated by it, will have the task of "mobilising world public opinion on behalf of disarmament".

If disarmament, as I have taken the liberty to suggest, were in the future to become the decisive criterion for the evaluation by the Nobel Committee of the activities for peace, it would constitute, just as the Campaign which I have mentioned, another invaluable element to convince all nuclear powers, including those which have been more reluctant up to now, of the necessity to respect the "vital interests" of all peoples and to become fully aware of the profound truth of the following conclusion which the United Nations approved by unanimity four years ago:

    "Mankind is confronted with a choice: we must halt the arms race and proceed to disarmament or face annihilation".
